
Motto: "Liberté, égalité, fraternité" (French)
Location of  metropolitan France  (dark green)– in Europe  (green & dark grey)– in the European Union  (green)
Location of  metropolitan France  (dark green)
Government 	Unitary semi‑presidential constitutional republic
•  	President of the Senate 	Gérard Larcher
•  	President of the National Assembly 	Claude Bartolone
•  	Republic established 	22 September 1792
•  	Current constitution[V] 	4 October 1958
•  	Metropolitan France (IGN) 	551,695 km2[VII] (50th)
•  	Metropolitan France (Cadastre) 	543,940.9 km2[VIII][2] (50th)
•  	Total 2016​ estimate 	66,644,000[VI][3] (20th)
•  	Metropolitan France February 2016 estimate 	64,529,000[4] (22nd)
France (French: [fʁɑ̃s]), officially the French Republic (French: République française [ʁepyblik fʁɑ̃sɛz]), is a sovereign state comprising territory in western Europe and several overseas regions and territories.
[XVI] The European part of France, called metropolitan France, extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean.
France spans 643,801 square kilometres (248,573 sq mi)[1] and has a total population of 66.
6 million.
[VI][8] It is a unitary semi-presidential republic with the capital in Paris, the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre.
The Constitution of France establishes the state as secular and democratic, with its sovereignty derived from the people.
During the Iron Age, what is now Metropolitan France was inhabited by the Gauls, a Celtic people. The Gauls were conquered in 51 BC by the Roman Empire, which held Gaul until 486.
The Gallo-Romans faced raids and migration from the Germanic Franks, who dominated the region for hundreds of years, eventually creating the medieval Kingdom of France.
France emerged as a major European power in the Late Middle Ages, with its victory in the Hundred Years' War (1337 to 1453) strengthening French state-building and paving the way for a future centralized absolute monarchy.
During the Renaissance, France experienced a vast cultural development and established the beginning of a global colonial empire.
The 16th century was dominated by religious civil wars between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots).
France became Europe's dominant cultural, political, and military power under Louis XIV.[9] French philosophers played a key role in the Age of Enlightenment during the 18th century.
In the late 18th century, the absolute monarchy was overthrown in the French Revolution.
Among its legacies was the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, one of the earliest documents on human rights, which expresses the nation's ideals to this day.
France became one of modern history's earliest republics until Napoleon took power and launched the First French Empire in 1804.
Fighting against a complex set of coalitions during the Napoleonic Wars, he dominated European affairs for over a decade and had a long-lasting impact on Western culture.
Following the collapse of the Empire, France endured a tumultuous succession of governments: the monarchy was restored, it was replaced in 1830 by a constitutional monarchy, then briefly by a Second Republic, and then by a Second Empire, until a more lasting French Third Republic was established in 1870.
The French republic had tumultuous relationships with the Catholic Church from the dechristianization of France during the French Revolution to the 1905 law establishing laïcité.
Laïcité is a strict but consensual form of secularism, which is nowadays an important federative principle in the modern French society.
France reached its territorial height during the 19th and early 20th centuries, when it ultimately possessed the second-largest colonial empire in the world.
[10] In World War I, France was one of the main winners as part of the Triple Entente alliance fighting against the Central Powers.
France was also one of the Allied Powers in World War II, but came under occupation by the Axis Powers in 1940.
Following liberation in 1944, a Fourth Republic was established and later dissolved in the course of the Algerian War.
The Fifth Republic, led by Charles de Gaulle, was formed in 1958 and remains to this day.
Following World War II, most of the French colonial empire became decolonized.
Throughout its long history, France has been a leading global center of culture, making significant contributions to art, science, and philosophy.
It hosts Europe's third-largest number of cultural UNESCO World Heritage Sites (after Italy and Spain) and receives around 83 million foreign tourists annually, the most of any country in the world.
[11] France remains a great power with significant cultural, economic, military, and political influence.
[12] It is a developed country with the world's sixth-largest economy by nominal GDP[13] and ninth-largest by purchasing power parity.
[14] According to Credit Suisse, France is the fourth wealthiest nation in the world in terms of aggregate household wealth.
[15] It also possesses the world's largest exclusive economic zone (EEZ), covering 11,691,000 square kilometres (4,514,000 sq mi).
French citizens enjoy a high standard of living, and the country performs well in international rankings of education, health care, life expectancy, civil liberties, and human development.
[17][18] France is a founding member of the United Nations, where it serves as one of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council.
It is a member of the Group of 7, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and La Francophonie.
France is a founding and leading member state of the European Union (EU).
[19]
2.1 Prehistory (before the 6th century BC)
2.2 Antiquity (6th century BC–5th century AD)
2.3 Early Middle Ages (5th century–10th century)
2.4 Late Middle Ages (10th century–15th century)
2.5 Early modern period (15th century–1789)
2.7 Contemporary period (1914–present)
3.4 Overseas territories and collectivities
Originally applied to the whole Frankish Empire, the name "France" comes from the Latin Francia, or "country of the Franks".
[20] Modern France is still named today Francia in Italian and Spanish, Frankreich in German and Frankrijk in Dutch, all of which have the same historical meaning.
There are various theories as to the origin of the name Frank. Following the precedents of Edward Gibbon and Jacob Grimm,[21] the name of the Franks has been linked with the word frank (free) in English.
[22] It has been suggested that the meaning of "free" was adopted because, after the conquest of Gaul, only Franks were free of taxation.
[23] Another theory is that it is derived from the Proto-Germanic word frankon, which translates as javelin or lance as the throwing axe of the Franks was known as a francisca.
[24] However, it has been determined that these weapons were named because of their use by the Franks, not the other way around.
[25]
One of the Lascaux paintings: a horse – Dordogne, approximately 18,000 BC
The oldest traces of human life in what is now France date from approximately 1.8 million years ago.[26] Humans were then confronted by a harsh and variable climate, marked by several glacial eras.
Early homonids led a nomadic hunter-gatherer life.
[26] France has a large number of decorated caves from the upper Paleolithic era, including one of the most famous and best preserved: Lascaux[26] (approximately 18,000 BC).
At the end of the last glacial period (10,000 BC), the climate became milder;[26] from approximately 7,000 BC, this part of Western Europe entered the Neolithic era and its inhabitants became sedentary.
After strong demographic and agricultural development between the 4th and 3rd millennia, metallurgy appeared at the end of the 3rd millennium, initially working gold, copper and bronze, and later iron.
[27] France has numerous megalithic sites from the Neolithic period, including the exceptionally dense Carnac stones site (approximately 3,300 BC).
Antiquity (6th century BC–5th century AD)
In 600 BC, Ionian Greeks, originating from Phocaea, founded the colony of Massalia (present-day Marseille), on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea.
This makes it France's oldest city.
[28][29] At the same time, some Gallic Celtic tribes penetrated parts of the current territory of France, and this occupation spread to the rest of France between the 5th and 3rd century BC.
[30]
The Maison Carrée was a temple of the Gallo-Roman city of Nemausus (present-day Nîmes) and is one of the best preserved vestiges of the Roman Empire.
The concept of Gaul emerged at that time; it corresponds to the territories of Celtic settlement ranging between the Rhine, the Atlantic Ocean, the Pyrenees and the Mediterranean.
The borders of modern France are roughly the same as those of ancient Gaul, which was inhabited by Celtic Gauls.
Gaul was then a prosperous country, of which the southernmost part was heavily subject to Greek and Roman influences.
Around 390 BC the Gallic chieftain Brennus and his troops made their way to Italy through the Alps, defeated the Romans in the Battle of the Allia, and besieged and ransomed Rome.
The Gallic invasion left Rome weakened, and the Gauls continued to harass the region until 345 BC when they entered into a formal peace treaty with Rome.
But the Romans and the Gauls would remain adversaries for the next several centuries, and the Gauls would continue to be a threat in Italia.
Around 125 BC, the south of Gaul was conquered by the Romans, who called this region Provincia Nostra ("Our Province"), which over time evolved into the name Provence in French.
[31] Julius Caesar conquered the remainder of Gaul and overcame a revolt carried out by the Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix in 52 BC.
[32] Gaul was divided by Augustus into Roman provinces.
[33] Many cities were founded during the Gallo-Roman period, including Lugdunum (present-day Lyon), which is considered the capital of the Gauls.
[33] These cities were built in traditional Roman style, with a forum, a theatre, a circus, an amphitheatre and thermal baths.
The Gauls mixed with Roman settlers and eventually adopted Roman culture and Roman speech (Latin, from which the French language evolved).
The Roman polytheism merged with the Gallic paganism into the same syncretism.
From the 250s to the 280s AD, Roman Gaul suffered a serious crisis with its fortified borders being attacked on several occasions by barbarians.
[34] Nevertheless, the situation improved in the first half of the 4th century, which was a period of revival and prosperity for Roman Gaul.
[35] In 312, the emperor Constantin I converted to Christianity.
Subsequently, Christians, who had been persecuted until then, increased rapidly across the entire Roman Empire.
[36] But, from the beginning of the 5th century, the Barbarian Invasions resumed,[37] and Germanic tribes, such as the Vandals, Suebi and Alans crossed the Rhine and settled in Gaul, Spain and other parts of the collapsing Roman Empire.
[38]
Early Middle Ages (5th century–10th century)
At the end of the Antiquity period, ancient Gaul was divided into several Germanic kingdoms and a remaining Gallo-Roman territory, known as the Kingdom of Syagrius.
Simultaneously, Celtic Britons, fleeing the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain, settled the western part of Armorica.
As a result, the Armorican peninsula was renamed Brittany, Celtic culture was revived and independent petty kingdoms arose in this region.
With Clovis' conversion to Catholicism in 498, the Frankish monarchy, elective and secular until then, became hereditary and of divine right.
The pagan Franks, from whom the ancient name of "Francie" was derived, originally settled the north part of Gaul, but under Clovis I conquered most of the other kingdoms in northern and central Gaul.
In 498, Clovis I was the first Germanic conqueror after the fall of the Roman Empire to convert to Catholic Christianity, rather than Arianism; thus France was given the title "Eldest daughter of the Church" (French: La fille aînée de l'Église) by the papacy,[39] and French kings would be called "the Most Christian Kings of France" (Rex Christianissimus).
The Franks embraced the Christian Gallo-Roman culture and ancient Gaul was eventually renamed Francia ("Land of the Franks").
The Germanic Franks adopted Romanic languages, except in northern Gaul where Roman settlements were less dense and where Germanic languages emerged.
Clovis made Paris his capital and established the Merovingian dynasty, but his kingdom would not survive his death.
The Franks treated land purely as a private possession and divided it among their heirs, so four kingdoms emerged from Clovis's: Paris, Orléans, Soissons, and Rheims.
The last Merovingian kings lost power to their mayors of the palace (head of household).
One mayor of the palace, Charles Martel, defeated an Islamic invasion of Gaul at the Battle of Tours (732) and earned respect and power within the Frankish kingdoms.
His son, Pepin the Short, seized the crown of Francia from the weakened Merovingians and founded the Carolingian dynasty.
Pepin's son, Charlemagne, reunited the Frankish kingdoms and built a vast empire across Western and Central Europe.
Proclaimed Holy Roman Emperor by Pope Leo III and thus establishing in earnest the French government's longtime historical association with the Catholic Church,[40] Charlemagne tried to revive the Western Roman Empire and its cultural grandeur.
Charlemagne's son, Louis I (emperor 814–840), kept the empire united; however, this Carolingian Empire would not survive his death.
In 843, under the Treaty of Verdun, the empire was divided between Louis' three sons, with East Francia going to Louis the German, Middle Francia to Lothair I, and West Francia to Charles the Bald.
West Francia approximated the area occupied by, and was the precursor, to modern France.
[41]
During the 9th and 10th centuries, continually threatened by Viking invasions, France became a very decentralised state: the nobility's titles and lands became hereditary, and the authority of the king became more religious than secular and thus was less effective and constantly challenged by powerful noblemen.
Thus was established feudalism in France.
Over time, some of the king's vassals would grow so powerful that they often posed a threat to the king.
For example, after the Battle of Hastings in 1066, William the Conqueror added "King of England" to his titles, becoming both the vassal to (as Duke of Normandy) and the equal of (as king of England) the king of France, creating recurring tensions.
Late Middle Ages (10th century–15th century)
Joan of Arc led the French army to several important victories during the Hundred Years' War, which paved the way for the final victory.
French territorial evolution from 985 to 1947
The Carolingian dynasty ruled France until 987, when Hugh Capet, Duke of France and Count of Paris, was crowned King of the Franks.
[42] His descendants—the Capetians, the House of Valois, and the House of Bourbon—progressively unified the country through wars and dynastic inheritance into the Kingdom of France, which was fully declared in 1190 by Philip II Augustus.
The French kings played a prominent role in most Crusades in order to restore Christian access to the Holy Land.
French knights made up the bulk of the steady flow of reinforcements throughout the two-hundred-year span of the Crusades, in such a fashion that the Arabs uniformly referred to the crusaders as Franj caring little whether they really came from France.
[43] The French Crusaders also imported the French language into the Levant, making French the base of the lingua franca ("Frankish language") of the Crusader states.
[43] French knights also comprised the majority in both the Hospital and the Temple orders.
The latter, in particular, held numerous properties throughout France and by the 13th century were the principal bankers for the French crown, until Philip IV annihilated the order in 1307.
The Albigensian Crusade was launched in 1209 to eliminate the heretical Cathars in the southwestern area of modern-day France.
In the end, the Cathars were exterminated and the autonomous County of Toulouse was annexed into the kingdom of France.
[44] Later kings expanded their domain to cover over half of modern continental France, including most of the north, centre and west of France.
Meanwhile, the royal authority became more and more assertive, centred on a hierarchically conceived society distinguishing nobility, clergy, and commoners.
Charles IV the Fair died without an heir in 1328.[45] Under the rules of the Salic law the crown of France could not pass to a woman nor could the line of kingship pass through the female line.
[45] Accordingly, the crown passed to Philip of Valois, a cousin of Charles, rather than through the female line to Charles' nephew, Edward, who would soon become Edward III of England.
During the reign of Philip of Valois, the French monarchy reached the height of its medieval power.
[45] Philip's seat on the throne was contested by Edward III of England and in 1337, on the eve of the first wave of the Black Death,[46] England and France went to war in what would become known as the Hundred Years' War.
[47] The exact boundaries changed greatly with time, but French landholdings of the English Kings remained extensive for decades.
With charismatic leaders, such as Joan of Arc and La Hire, strong French counterattacks won back English continental territories.
Like the rest of Europe, France was struck by the Black Death; half of the 17 million population of France died.
The St. Bartholomew's Day massacre (1572) was the climax of the French Wars of Religion, which were brought to an end by the Edict of Nantes (1598).
The French Renaissance saw a spectacular cultural development and the first standardization of the French language, which would become the official language of France and the language of Europe's aristocracy.
It also saw a long set of wars, known as the Italian Wars, between the Kingdom of France and the powerful Holy Roman Empire.
French explorers, such as Jacques Cartier or Samuel de Champlain, claimed lands in the Americas for France, paving the way for the expansion of the First French colonial empire.
The rise of Protestantism in Europe led France to a civil war known as the French Wars of Religion, where, in the most notorious incident, thousands of Huguenots were murdered in the St.
Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572.
[50] The Wars of Religion were ended by Henry IV's Edict of Nantes, which granted some freedom of religion to the Huguenots.
Under Louis XIII, the energetic Cardinal Richelieu reinforced the centralization of the state, royal power and French dominance in Europe, foreshadowing the reign of Louis XIV.
During Louis XIV's minority and the regency of Queen Anne and Cardinal Mazarin, a period of trouble known as the Fronde occurred in France, which was at that time at war with Spain.
This rebellion was driven by the great feudal lords and sovereign courts as a reaction to the rise of royal power in France.
Louis XIV, the "sun king" was the absolute monarch of France and made France the leading European power.
The monarchy reached its peak during the 17th century and the reign of Louis XIV. By turning powerful feudal lords into courtiers at the Palace of Versailles, Louis XIV's personal power became unchallenged.
Remembered for his numerous wars, he made France the leading European power.
France became the most populous country in Europe and had tremendous influence over European politics, economy, and culture.
French became the most-used language in diplomacy, science, literature and international affairs, and remained so until the 20th century.
[51] France obtained many overseas possessions in the Americas, Africa and Asia.
Louis XIV also revoked the Edict of Nantes, forcing thousands of Huguenots into exile.
Under Louis XV, Louis XIV's grandson, France lost New France and most of its Indian possessions after its defeat in the Seven Years' War, which ended in 1763.
Its European territory kept growing, however, with notable acquisitions such as Lorraine (1766) and Corsica (1770).
An unpopular king, Louis XV's weak rule, his ill-advised financial, political and military decisions – as well as the debauchery of his court– discredited the monarchy and arguably led to the French Revolution 15 years after his death.
[52][53]
Louis XVI, Louis XV's grandson, actively supported the Americans, who were seeking their independence from Great Britain (realized in the Treaty of Paris (1783)).
The financial crisis that followed France's involvement in the American Revolutionary War was one of many contributing factors to the French Revolution.
Much of the Enlightenment occurred in French intellectual circles, and major scientific breakthroughs and inventions, such as the discovery of oxygen (1778) and the first hot air balloon carrying passengers (1783), were achieved by French scientists.
French explorers, such as Bougainville and Lapérouse, took part in the voyages of scientific exploration through maritime expeditions around the globe.
The Enlightenment philosophy, in which reason is advocated as the primary source for legitimacy and authority, undermined the power of and support for the monarchy and helped pave the way for the French Revolution.
The Storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789 was the starting event of the French Revolution.
Facing financial troubles, Louis XVI summoned the Estates-General (gathering the three Estates of the realm) in May 1789 to propose solutions to his government.
As it came to an impasse, the representatives of the Third Estate formed into a National Assembly, signaling the outbreak of the French Revolution.
Fearing that the king would suppress the newly created National Assembly, insurgents stormed the Bastille on 14 July 1789, a date which would become France's National Day.
The absolute monarchy was subsequently replaced by a constitutional monarchy. Through the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, France established fundamental rights for men.
The Declaration affirms "the natural and imprescriptible rights of man" to "liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression".
Freedom of speech and press were declared, and arbitrary arrests outlawed.
It called for the destruction of aristocratic privileges and proclaimed freedom and equal rights for all men, as well as access to public office based on talent rather than birth.
While Louis XVI, as a constitutional king, enjoyed popularity among the population, his disastrous flight to Varennes seemed to justify rumours he had tied his hopes of political salvation to the prospects of foreign invasion.
His credibility was so deeply undermined that the abolition of the monarchy and establishment of a republic became an increasing possibility.
European monarchies gathered against the new régime, to restore the French absolute monarchy. The foreign threat exacerbated France's political turmoil and deepened the sense of urgency among the various factions and war was declared against Austria on 20 April 1792.
Mob violence occurred during the insurrection of 10 August 1792[54] and the following month.
[55] As a result of this violence and the political instability of the constitutional monarchy, the Republic was proclaimed on 22 September 1792.
Napoleon, Emperor of the French, and his Grande Armée built a vast Empire across Europe. He helped spread the French revolutionary ideals and his legal reforms had a major influence worldwide.
Louis XVI was convicted of treason and guillotined in 1793. Facing increasing pressure from European monarchies, internal guerrilla wars and counterrevolutions (such as the War in the Vendée or the Chouannerie), the young Republic fell into the Reign of Terror.
Between 1793 and 1794, between 16,000 and 40,000 people were executed.
In Western France, the civil war between the Bleus ("Blues", supporters of the Revolution) and the Blancs ("Whites", supporters of the Monarchy) lasted from 1793 to 1796 and led to the loss of between 200,000 and 450,000 lives.
[56][57] Both foreign armies and French counter-revolutionaries were crushed and the French Republic survived.
Furthermore, it extended greatly its boundaries and established "Sister Republics" in the surrounding countries.
As the threat of a foreign invasion receded and France became mostly pacified, the Thermidorian Reaction put an end to Robespierre's rule and to the Terror.
The abolition of slavery and male universal suffrage, enacted during this radical phase of the revolution, were cancelled by subsequent governments.
After a short-lived governmental scheme, Napoleon Bonaparte seized control of the Republic in 1799 becoming First Consul and later Emperor of the French Empire (1804–1814/1815).
As a continuation of the wars sparked by the European monarchies against the French Republic, changing sets of European Coalitions declared wars on Napoleon's Empire.
His armies conquered most of continental Europe with swift victories such as the battles of Jena-Auerstadt or Austerlitz.
He redrew the European political map, while members of the Bonaparte family were appointed as monarchs in some of the newly established kingdoms.
[58] These victories led to the worldwide expansion of French revolutionary ideals and reforms, such as the Metric system, the Napoleonic Code and the Declaration of the Rights of Man.
After the catastrophic Russian campaign, and the ensuing uprising of European monarchies against his rule, Napoleon was defeated and the Bourbon monarchy restored.
About a million Frenchmen died during the Napoleonic Wars.
Animated map of the growth and decline of the French colonial empire.
After his brief return from exile, Napoleon was finally defeated in 1815 at the Battle of Waterloo, the monarchy was re-established (1815–1830), with new constitutional limitations.
The discredited Bourbon dynasty was overthrown by the July Revolution of 1830, which established the constitutional July Monarchy, which lasted until 1848, when the French Second Republic was proclaimed, in the wake of the European Revolutions of 1848.
The abolition of slavery and male universal suffrage, both briefly enacted during the French Revolution were re-enacted in 1848.
In 1852, the president of the French Republic, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, Napoleon I's nephew, was proclaimed emperor of the second Empire, as Napoleon III.
He multiplied French interventions abroad, especially in Crimea, in Mexico and Italy which resulted in the annexation of the duchy of Savoy and the county of Nice, then part of the Kingdom of Sardinia.
Napoleon III was unseated following defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 and his regime was replaced by the Third Republic.
France had colonial possessions, in various forms, since the beginning of the 17th century, but in the 19th and 20th centuries, its global overseas colonial empire extended greatly and became the second largest in the world behind the British Empire.
Including metropolitan France, the total area of land under French sovereignty almost reached 13 million square kilometres in the 1920s and 1930s, 8.
Known as the Belle Époque, the turn of the century was a period characterized by optimism, regional peace, economic prosperity and technological, scientific and cultural innovations.
In 1905, state secularism was officially established.
French poilus sustained the highest number of casualties among the Allies in World War I.
France was a member of the Triple Entente when World War I broke out. A small part of Northern France was occupied, but France and its allies emerged victorious against the Central Powers at a tremendous human and material cost.
World War I left 1.
4 million French soldiers dead, 4% of its population.
[59] Between 27 and 30% of soldiers conscripted from 1912–1915 were killed.
[60] The interbellum years were marked by intense international tensions and a variety of social reforms introduced by the Popular Front government (annual leave, eight-hour workdays, women in government, etc.
.
.
).
Charles de Gaulle took an active part in many major events of the 20th century: a hero of World War I, leader of the Free French during World War II, he then became President, where he facilitated decolonization, maintained France as a major power and overcame the revolt of May 1968.
In 1940 France was invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany. Metropolitan France was divided into a German occupation zone in the north and Vichy France, a newly established authoritarian regime collaborating with Germany, in the south, while Free France, the government-in-exile led by Charles de Gaulle, was set up in London.
[61] From 1942 to 1944, about 160,000 French citizens, including around 75,000 Jews,[62][63][64] were deported to death camps and concentration camps in Germany and Poland.
[65] On 6 June 1944 the Allies invaded Normandy and in August they invaded Provence.
Over the following year the Allies and the French Resistance emerged victorious over the Axis powers and French sovereignty was restored with the establishment of the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF).
This interim government, established by de Gaulle, aimed to continue to wage war against Germany and to purge collaborators from office.
It also made several important reforms (suffrage extended to women, creation of a social security system).
The GPRF laid the groundwork for a new constitutional order that resulted in the Fourth Republic, which saw spectacular economic growth (les Trente Glorieuses).
France was one of the founding members of NATO (1949).
France attempted to regain control of French Indochina but was defeated by the Viet Minh in 1954 at the climactic Battle of Dien Bien Phu.
Only months later, France faced another anti-colonialist conflict in Algeria.
Torture and illegal executions were perpetrated by both sides and the debate over whether or not to keep control of Algeria, then home to over one million European settlers,[66] wracked the country and nearly led to a coup and civil war.
[67]
In 1958, the weak and unstable Fourth Republic gave way to the Fifth Republic, which included a strengthened Presidency.
[68] In the latter role, Charles de Gaulle managed to keep the country together while taking steps to end the war.
The Algerian War was concluded with the Évian Accords in 1962 that led to Algerian independence.
A vestige of the colonial empire are the French overseas departments and territories.
In the context of the Cold War, de Gaulle pursued a policy of "national independence" towards the Western and Eastern blocs.
To this end, he withdrew from NATO's military integrated command, he launched a nuclear development program and made France the fourth nuclear power.
He restored cordial Franco-German relations in order to create a European counterweight between the American and Soviet spheres of influence.
However, he opposed any development of a supranational Europe, favouring a Europe of sovereign Nations.
In the wake of the series of worldwide protests of 1968, the revolt of May 1968 had an enormous social impact.
In France, it is considered to be the watershed moment when a conservative moral ideal (religion, patriotism, respect for authority) shifted towards a more liberal moral ideal (secularism, individualism, sexual revolution).
Although the revolt was a political failure (as the Gaullist party emerged even stronger than before) it announced a split between the French people and de Gaulle who resigned shortly after.
Republican march, Place de la République, Paris.
In the post-Gaullist era, France remained one of the most developed economies in the World, but faced several economic crises that resulted in high unemployment rates and increasing public debt.
In the late 20th and early 21st centuries France has been at the forefront of the development of a supranational European Union, notably by signing the Maastricht Treaty (which created the European Union) in 1992, establishing the Eurozone in 1999, and signing the Lisbon Treaty in 2007.
[69] France has also gradually but fully reintegrated into NATO and has since participated in most NATO sponsored wars.
[70]
Since the 19th century France has received many immigrants. These have been mostly male foreign workers from European Catholic countries who generally returned home when not employed.
[71] During the 1970s France faced economic crisis and allowed new immigrants (mostly from the Maghreb[71]) to permanently settle in France with their families and to acquire French citizenship.
It resulted in hundreds of thousands of Muslims (especially in the larger cities) living in subsidized public housing and suffering from very high unemployment rates.
[72] Simultaneously France renounced the assimilation of immigrants, where they were expected to adhere to French traditional values and cultural norms.
They were encouraged to retain their distinctive cultures and traditions and required merely to integrate.
In 2015, Paris was struck several times by Islamic terrorists. Notably the Charlie Hebdo attack in January which provoked the largest public rallies in French history, gathering 4.
4 million people,[74][75] and the November attacks which resulted in 130 deaths, the deadliest attack on French soil since World War II,[76][77] and the deadliest in the European Union since the Madrid train bombings in 2004.
[78]
A relief map of Metropolitan France, showing cities with over 100,000 inhabitants.
France has the World's second largest territorial waters.
Metropolitan France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean; due to its shape, it is often referred to in French as l'Hexagone ("The Hexagon").
France is one of only three countries (with Morocco and Spain) to have both Atlantic and Mediterranean coastlines.
Metropolitan France is situated mostly between latitudes 41° and 51° N, and longitudes 6° W and 10° E, on the western edge of Europe, and thus lies within the northern temperate zone.
From northeast to southwest, Metropolitan France shares borders with Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Monaco, Spain and Andorra.
France also borders Suriname to its west and Brazil to its east and south, by way of the overseas region of French Guiana, which is considered an integral part of the Republic.
[79] France also shares a border with the Kingdom of the Netherlands, through the Caribbean island of Saint Martin.
The territory of the French Republic consists of
French regions, which are the highest level of integration in the French unitary state. Metropolitan regions and overseas regions are often differentiated although they have exactly the same legal status.
The main difference between metropolitan and overseas regions is a reduced value-added tax in the overseas regions to offset the higher cost of imports.
Metropolitan regions: comprising the European territory of France, Corsica and minor coastal islands included
Overseas regions: Guadeloupe, Martinique, Réunion, Mayotte and French Guiana
Overseas collectivities: French Polynesia, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin and Saint Pierre and Miquelon and Wallis and Futuna
The overseas territory of French Southern and Antarctic Lands divided in five districts: Kerguelen Islands, St.
Paul and Amsterdam islands, Crozet Islands, Adélie Land and the Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean
The special collectivity of New Caledonia
Clipperton Island under direct authority of the Minister of Overseas France
The European territory of France covers 551,500 square kilometres (212,935 sq mi),[79] the largest among European Union members.
[19] France's total land area, with its overseas departments and territories (excluding Adélie Land), is 643,801 km2 (248,573 sq mi), 0.
45% of the total land area on Earth.
France possesses a wide variety of landscapes, from coastal plains in the north and west to mountain ranges of the Alps in the southeast, the Massif Central in the south central and Pyrenees in the southwest.
Due to its numerous overseas departments and territories scattered on all oceans of the planet, France possesses the second-largest Exclusive economic zone (EEZ) in the world, covering 11,035,000 km2 (4,260,000 mi2), just behind the EEZ of the United States (11,351,000 km2 / 4,383,000 mi2), but ahead of the EEZ of Australia (8,148,250 km2 / 4,111,312 mi2).
Its EEZ covers approximately 8% of the total surface of all the EEZs of the world.
At 4,810.45 metres (15,782 ft)[80] above sea level, the highest point in Western Europe, Mont Blanc, is situated in the Alps on the border between France and Italy.
France also has extensive river systems such as the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne, and the Rhone, which divides the Massif Central from the Alps and flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the Camargue.
Corsica lies off the Mediterranean coast.
Metropolitan France has four broad climate zones:
An oceanic climate in the west and northwest: warm (but not hot) summers and cool (but not cold) winters
A semi-continental climate in the northeast: hot summers and cold winters
A Mediterranean climate in the south and southeast: hot summers and mild winters
A mountain (or alpine) climate in the Alps, the Pyrenees, the Massif Central, the Jura and the Vosges: mild summers and cold winters
Except in the south which has generally dry summers, rain is evenly dispersed throughout the year in the rest of the country.
In the overseas regions, there are three broad types of climate:
A tropical climate in most overseas regions: high constant temperature throughout the year with a dry and a wet season
An equatorial climate in French Guiana: high constant temperature throughout the year with even precipitation throughout the year
A subpolar climate in Saint Pierre and Miquelon and in most of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands: short mild summers and long very cold winters
Mediterranean vegetation (lavender) in Provence
Alpine climate (winter) in the French Alps
Tropical climate in Bora Bora (French Polynesia)
Marine (blue), Regional (green) and National (red) natural parks in France
Mont Blanc is the highest summit in Western Europe.
France was one of the first countries to create an environment ministry, in 1971.[81] Although it is one of the most industrialised countries in the world, France is ranked only 17th by carbon dioxide emissions, behind less populous nations such as Canada or Australia.
This is due to France's decision to invest in nuclear power following the 1973 oil crisis,[82] which now accounts for 75% of its electricity production[83] and results in less pollution.
[84][85]
Like all European Union members, France agreed to cut carbon emissions by at least 20% of 1990 levels by the year 2020,[86] compared to the U.
S.
plan to reduce emissions by 4% of 1990 levels.
[87] As of 2009, French carbon dioxide emissions per capita were lower than that of China's.
[88] The country was set to impose a carbon tax in 2009 at 17 euros per tonne of carbon emitted,[89] which would have raised 4 billion euros of revenue annually.
[90] However, the plan was abandoned due to fears of burdening French businesses.
[91]
Forests account for 28% of France's land area,[92][93] and are some of the most diverse in Europe, comprising more than 140 species of trees.
[94] There are nine national parks[95] and 46 natural parks in France,[96] with the government planning to convert 20% of its Exclusive Economic Zone into a Marine Protected Area by 2020.
[97] A regional nature park[98] (French: parc naturel régional or PNR) is a public establishment in France between local authorities and the French national government covering an inhabited rural area of outstanding beauty, in order to protect the scenery and heritage as well as setting up sustainable economic development in the area.
[99] A PNR sets goals and guidelines for managed human habitation, sustainable economic development, and protection of the natural environment based on each park's unique landscape and heritage.
The parks also foster ecological research programs and public education in the natural sciences.
[100] As of 2014 there are 49 PNRs in France.
According to the 2012 Environmental Performance Index conducted by Yale and Columbia, France was the sixth-most environmentally conscious country in the world, one place higher than the previous report in 2010.
[101][102]
The 18 regions and 101 departments of France. Paris area is expanded (inset at upper left); overseas regions (lower left) not shown to scale.
France is divided into 18 administrative regions: 13 regions in metropolitan France (including the territorial collectivity of Corsica),[103] and five located overseas.
[79] The regions are further subdivided into 101 departments,[104] which are numbered mainly alphabetically.
This number is used in postal codes and was formerly used on vehicle number plates.
Among the 101 departments of France, five (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, and Réunion) are in overseas regions (ROMs) that are also simultaneously overseas departments (DOMs) and are an integral part of France (and the European Union) and thus enjoy exactly the same status as metropolitan departments.
The 101 departments are subdivided into 335 arrondissements, which are, in turn, subdivided into 2,054 cantons.
[105] These cantons are then divided into 36,658 communes, which are municipalities with an elected municipal council.
[105] Three communes—Paris, Lyon and Marseille—are subdivided into 45 municipal arrondissements.
The regions, departments and communes are all known as territorial collectivities, meaning they possess local assemblies as well as an executive.
Arrondissements and cantons are merely administrative divisions.
However, this was not always the case.
Until 1940, the arrondissements were territorial collectivities with an elected assembly, but these were suspended by the Vichy regime and definitely abolished by the Fourth Republic in 1946.
In addition to the 18 regions and 101 departments, the French Republic has five overseas collectivities (French Polynesia, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, and Wallis and Futuna), one sui generis collectivity (New Caledonia), one overseas territory (French Southern and Antarctic Lands), and one island possession in the Pacific Ocean (Clipperton Island).
The lands making up the French Republic, shown at the same geographic scale.
Overseas collectivities and territories form part of the French Republic, but do not form part of the European Union or its fiscal area (with the exception of St.
Bartelemy, which seceded from Guadeloupe in 2007).
The Pacific Collectivities (COMs) of French Polynesia, Wallis and Fortuna, and New Caledonia continue to use the CFP franc[106] whose value is strictly linked to that of the euro.
In contrast, the five overseas regions used the French franc and now use the euro.
[107]
Clipperton Island 	State private property under the direct authority of the French government 	Uninhabited
French Polynesia 	Designated as an overseas land (pays d'outre-mer or POM), the status is the same as an overseas collectivity.
Papeete
French Southern and Antarctic Lands 	Overseas territory (territoire d'outre-mer or TOM) 	Port-aux-Français
New Caledonia 	Sui generis collectivity 	Nouméa
Saint Barthélemy 	Overseas collectivity (collectivité d'outre-mer or COM) 	Gustavia
Saint Martin 	Overseas collectivity (collectivité d'outre-mer or COM) 	Marigot
Saint Pierre and Miquelon 	Overseas collectivity (collectivité d'outre-mer or COM). Still referred to as a collectivité territoriale.
Saint-Pierre
Wallis and Futuna 	Overseas collectivity (collectivité d'outre-mer or COM). Still referred to as a territoire.
Mata-Utu
François Hollande, elected President of the French Republic in April 2012.
The French Republic is a unitary semi-presidential republic with strong democratic traditions.[108] The constitution of the Fifth Republic was approved by referendum on 28 September 1958.
[109] It greatly strengthened the authority of the executive in relation to parliament.
The executive branch itself has two leaders: the President of the Republic, currently François Hollande, who is head of state and is elected directly by universal adult suffrage for a 5-year term (formerly 7 years),[110] and the Government, led by the president-appointed Prime Minister, currently Manuel Valls.
The French parliament is a bicameral legislature comprising a National Assembly (Assemblée Nationale) and a Senate.
[111] The National Assembly deputies represent local constituencies and are directly elected for 5-year terms.
[112] The Assembly has the power to dismiss the government, and thus the majority in the Assembly determines the choice of government.
Senators are chosen by an electoral college for 6-year terms (originally 9-year terms), and one half of the seats are submitted to election every 3 years starting in September 2008.
[113]
The Senate's legislative powers are limited; in the event of disagreement between the two chambers, the National Assembly has the final say.
[114] The government has a strong influence in shaping the agenda of Parliament.
French politics are characterised by two politically opposed groupings: one left-wing, centred on the French Socialist Party, and the other right-wing, centred previously around the Rassemblement pour la République (RPR), then its successor the UMP Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), which in 2015 was renamed Les Républicains.
[115] Since the 2012 elections, the executive branch is currently composed mostly of the Socialist Party.
France uses a civil legal system;[79] that is, law arises primarily from written statutes; judges are not to make law, but merely to interpret it (though the amount of judicial interpretation in certain areas makes it equivalent to case law).
Basic principles of the rule of law were laid in the Napoleonic Code (which was, in turn, largely based on the royal law codified under Louis XIV).
In agreement with the principles of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, law should only prohibit actions detrimental to society.
As Guy Canivet, first president of the Court of Cassation, wrote about the management of prisons: Freedom is the rule, and its restriction is the exception; any restriction of Freedom must be provided for by Law and must follow the principles of necessity and proportionality.
That is, Law should lay out prohibitions only if they are needed, and if the inconveniences caused by this restriction do not exceed the inconveniences that the prohibition is supposed to remedy.
The basic principles that the French Republic must respect are found in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
French law is divided into two principal areas: private law and public law. Private law includes, in particular, civil law and criminal law.
Public law includes, in particular, administrative law and constitutional law.
However, in practical terms, French law comprises three principal areas of law: civil law, criminal law, and administrative law.
Criminal laws can only address the future and not the past (criminal ex post facto laws are prohibited).
While administrative law is often a subcategory of civil law in many countries, it is completely separated in France and each body of law is headed by a specific supreme court: ordinary courts (which handle criminal and civil litigation) are headed by the Court of Cassation and administrative courts are headed by the Council of State.
To be applicable, every law must be officially published in the Journal officiel de la République française.
France does not recognize religious law as a motivation for the enactment of prohibitions. France has long had neither blasphemy laws nor sodomy laws (the latter being abolished in 1791).
However, "offenses against public decency" (contraires aux bonnes mœurs) or disturbing public order (trouble à l'ordre public) have been used to repress public expressions of homosexuality or street prostitution.
Since 1999, civil unions for homosexual couples are permitted, and since May 2013, same-sex marriage and LGBT adoption are legal in France.
[116] Laws prohibiting discriminatory speech in the press are as old as 1881.
Some consider however that hate speech laws in France are too broad or severe and damage freedom of speech.
[117] France has laws against racism and antisemitism.
[118] Since 1990, the Gayssot Act prohibits Holocaust denial.
France's attitude towards freedom of religion is complex. Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the constitutional rights set forth in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
However, since the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State, the State tries to prevent its policy-making from being influenced by religion and became suspicious in recent decades towards new religious tendencies of the French society: the Parliament has listed many religious movements as dangerous cults since 1995, and has banned wearing conspicuous religious symbols in schools since 2004.
In 2010, it banned the wearing of face-covering Islamic veils in public.
As some have complained that they have suffered from discrimination thus, and after criticism by human rights groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch,[119][120] these laws remain controversial, although they are supported by most of the population.
French President François Mitterrand and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in 1987.
France is a founding member of the United Nations and serves as one of the permanent members of the UN Security Council with veto rights.
[122] In 2015, France was described as being "the best networked state in the world", because it is a country that "is member of more multi-lateral organisations than any other country".
[123]
France is a member of the G8, World Trade Organization (WTO),[124] the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC)[125] and the Indian Ocean Commission (COI).
[126] It is an associate member of the Association of Caribbean States (ACS)[127] and a leading member of the International Francophone Organisation (OIF) of fifty-one fully or partly French-speaking countries.
[128]
As a significant hub for international relations, France hosts the second largest assembly of diplomatic missions in the world and the headquarters of international organizations including the OECD, UNESCO, Interpol, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, and la Francophonie.
[129]
Postwar French foreign policy has been largely shaped by membership of the European Union, of which it was a founding member.
Since the 1960s, France has developed close ties with reunified Germany to become the most influential driving force of the EU.
[130] In the 1960s, France sought to exclude the British from the European unification process,[131] seeking to build its own standing in continental Europe.
However, since 1904, France has maintained an "Entente cordiale" with the United Kingdom, and there has been a strengthening of links between the countries, especially militarily.
The European Parliament in Strasbourg, near the border with Germany. France is a founding member of all EU institutions.
France is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), but under President de Gaulle, it excluded itself from the joint military command to protest the special relationship between the United States and Britain and to preserve the independence of French foreign and security policies.
[132] France vigorously opposed the 2003 invasion of Iraq,[133][134] straining bilateral relations with the US[135][136] and the UK.
[137] However, as a result of Nicolas Sarkozy's pro-American politics (much criticised in France by the leftists and by a part of the right),[138][139] France rejoined the NATO joint military command on 4 April 2009.
In the early 1990s, the country drew considerable criticism from other nations for its underground nuclear tests in French Polynesia.
[140]
France retains strong political and economic influence in its former African colonies (Françafrique)[141] and has supplied economic aid and troops for peace-keeping missions in Ivory Coast and Chad.
[142] Recently, after the unilateral declaration of independence of northern Mali by the Tuareg MNLA and the subsequent regional Northern Mali conflict with several Islamist groups including Ansar Dine and MOJWA, France and other African states intervened to help the Malian Army to retake control.
In 2013, France was the fourth largest (in absolute terms) donor of development aid in the world, behind the US, the UK and Germany.
This represents 0.
36% of its GDP, in this regard rating France as twelfth largest donor on the list.
[143] The organisation managing the French help is the French Development Agency, which finances primarily humanitarian projects in sub-Saharan Africa.
[144] The main goals of this help are "developing infrastructure, access to health care and education, the implementation of appropriate economic policies and the consolidation of the rule of law and democracy".
[144]
Examples of France's military. Clockwise from top left: Nuclear aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle; A Rafale fighter aircraft; French Chasseurs Alpins patrolling the valleys of Kapisa province in Afghanistan; a Leclerc tank in Paris for the 14 July Bastille Day Military Parade.
The French Armed Forces (Forces armées françaises) are the military and paramilitary forces of France, under the president as supreme commander.
They consist of the French Army (Armée de Terre), French Navy (Marine Nationale, formerly called Armée de Mer), the French Air Force (Armée de l'Air), the French Strategic Nuclear Force (Force Nucléaire Stratégique, nicknamed Force de Frappe or "Strike Force") and the Military Police called National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie nationale), which also fulfils civil police duties in the rural areas of France.
Together they are among the largest armed forces in the world.
While the Gendarmerie is an integral part of the French armed forces (gendarmes are career soldiers), and therefore under the purview of the Ministry of Defence, it is operationally attached to the Ministry of the Interior as far as its civil police duties are concerned.
When acting as general purpose police force, the Gendarmerie encompasses the counter terrorist units of the Parachute Intervention Squadron of the National Gendarmerie (Escadron Parachutiste d'Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale), the National Gendarmerie Intervention Group (Groupe d'Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale), the Search Sections of the National Gendarmerie (Sections de Recherche de la Gendarmerie Nationale), responsible for criminal enquiries, and the Mobile Brigades of the National Gendarmerie (Brigades mobiles de la Gendarmerie Nationale, or in short Gendarmerie mobile) which have the task to maintain public order.
The following special units are also part of the Gendarmerie: The Republican Guard (Garde républicaine) which protects public buildings hosting major French institutions, the Maritime Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie maritime) serving as Coast Guard, the Provost Service (Prévôté), acting as the Military Police branch of the Gendarmerie.
As far as the French intelligence units are concerned, the Directorate-General for External Security (Direction Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure) is considered to be a component of the Armed Forces under the authority of the Ministry of Defence.
The other, the Central Directorate for Interior Intelligence (Direction centrale du renseignement intérieur) is a division of the National Police Force (Direction générale de la Police Nationale), and therefore reports directly to the Ministry of the Interior.
There has been no national conscription since 1997.
[145]
France has a special military corps, the French Foreign Legion, founded in 1830, which consists of foreign nationals from over 140 countries who are willing to serve in the French Armed Forces and become French citizens after the end of their service period.
The only other countries having similar units are Spain (the Spanish Foreign Legion, called Tercio, was founded in 1920) and Luxembourg (foreigners can serve in the National Army provided they speak Luxembourgish).
France is a permanent member of the Security Council of the UN, and a recognised nuclear state since 1960.
France has signed and ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)[146] and acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
France's annual military expenditure in 2011 was US$62.
5 billion, or 2.
3%, of its GDP making it the fifth biggest military spender in the world after the United States, China, Russia, and the United Kingdom.
[147]
French nuclear deterrence, (formerly known as "Force de Frappe"), relies on complete independence. The current French nuclear force consists of four Triomphant class submarines equipped with submarine-launched ballistic missiles.
In addition to the submarine fleet, it is estimated that France has about 60 ASMP medium-range air-to-ground missiles with nuclear warheads,[148] of which around 50 are deployed by the Air Force using the Mirage 2000N long-range nuclear strike aircraft, while around 10 are deployed by the French Navy's Super Étendard Modernisé (SEM) attack aircraft, which operate from the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle.
The new Rafale F3 aircraft will gradually replace all Mirage 2000N and SEM in the nuclear strike role with the improved ASMP-A missile with a nuclear warhead.
France has major military industries with one of the largest aerospace industries in the world.[149][150] Its industries have produced such equipment as the Rafale fighter, the Charles de Gaulle aircraft carrier, the Exocet missile and the Leclerc tank among others.
Despite withdrawing from the Eurofighter project, France is actively investing in European joint projects such as the Eurocopter Tiger, multipurpose frigates, the UCAV demonstrator nEUROn and the Airbus A400M.
France is a major arms seller,[151][152] with most of its arsenal's designs available for the export market with the notable exception of nuclear-powered devices.
The military parade held in Paris each 14 July for France's national day, called Bastille Day in English-speaking countries (but not in France), is the oldest and largest regular military parade in Europe.
[153]
In April and May 2012, France held a presidential election in which the winner, François Hollande, had opposed austerity measures, promising to eliminate France's budget deficit by 2017.
The new government stated that it aimed to cancel recently enacted tax cuts and exemptions for the wealthy, raising the top tax bracket rate to 75% on incomes over a million euros, restoring the retirement age to 60 with a full pension for those who have worked 42 years, restoring 60,000 jobs recently cut from public education, regulating rent increases; and building additional public housing for the poor.
In June, Hollande's Socialist Party won a supermajority in legislative elections capable of amending the French Constitution and enabling the immediate enactment of the promised reforms.
French government bond interest rates fell 30% to record lows,[154] less than 50 basis points above German government bond rates.
[155]
Under European Union rules, member states are supposed to limit their debt to 60% of output or be reducing the ratio structurally towards this ceiling, and run public deficits of no more than 3% of GDP.
The French government has run a budget deficit each year since the early 1970s.
In 2012, French government debt levels reached 1.
8 trillion euros, the equivalent of 90% of French GDP.
[156]
In late 2012, credit rating agencies warned that growing French government debt levels risked France's AAA credit rating, raising the possibility of a future downgrade and subsequent higher borrowing costs for the French government.
[157]
A member of the Group of 7 (formerly G8) leading industrialised countries, as of 2014, it is ranked as the world's ninth largest and the EU's second largest economy by purchasing power parity.
[14] With 31 of the 500 biggest companies in the world in 2015, France ranks fourth in the Fortune Global 500, ahead of Germany and the UK.
[158] France joined 11 other EU members to launch the euro in 1999, with euro coins and banknotes completely replacing the French franc (₣) in 2002.
[159]
France is part of a monetary union, the Eurozone (dark blue), and of the EU single market.
France has a mixed economy that combines extensive private enterprise[160][161] with substantial state enterprise and government intervention.
The government retains considerable influence over key segments of infrastructure sectors, with majority ownership of railway, electricity, aircraft, nuclear power and telecommunications.
[79] It has been relaxing its control over these sectors since the early 1990s.
[79] The government is slowly corporatising the state sector and selling off holdings in France Télécom, Air France, as well as in the insurance, banking, and defence industries.
[79] France has an important aerospace industry led by the European consortium Airbus, and has its own national spaceport, the Centre Spatial Guyanais.
According to the World Trade Organization (WTO), in 2009 France was the world's sixth largest exporter and the fourth largest importer of manufactured goods.
[162] In 2008, France was the third largest recipient of foreign direct investment among OECD countries at $118 billion, ranking behind Luxembourg (where foreign direct investment was essentially monetary transfers to banks located there) and the US ($316 billion), but above the UK ($96.
9 billion), Germany ($25 billion), or Japan ($24 billion).
[163][164]
In the same year, French companies invested $220 billion outside France, ranking France as the second largest outward direct investor in the OECD, behind the US ($311 billion), and ahead of the UK ($111 billion), Japan ($128 billion) and Germany ($157 billion).
[163][164]
Financial services, banking and the insurance sector are an important part of the economy. The Paris stock exchange (French: La Bourse de Paris) is an old institution, created by Louis XV in 1724.
[165] In 2000, the stock exchanges of Paris, Amsterdam and Bruxelles merged into Euronext.
[166] In 2007, Euronext merged with the New York stock exchange to form NYSE Euronext, the world's largest stock exchange.
[166] Euronext Paris, the French branch of the NYSE Euronext group is Europe's 2nd largest stock exchange market, behind the London Stock Exchange.
France is part of the European single market which represents more than 500 million consumers. Several domestic commercial policies are determined by agreements among European Union (EU) members and by EU legislation.
France introduced the common European currency, the Euro in 2002.
[167][168] It is a member of the Eurozone which represents around 330 million citizens.
French companies have maintained key positions in the insurance and banking industries: AXA is the world's largest insurance company.
The leading French banks are BNP Paribas and the Crédit Agricole, ranking as the world's first and sixth largest banks in 2010[169] (by assets), while the Société Générale group was ranked the world's eighth largest in 2009.
Champagne, widely regarded as a luxury good, originates from the Champagne region in northeast France.
France has historically been a large producer of agricultural products.[170] Extensive tracts of fertile land, the application of modern technology, and EU subsidies have combined to make France the leading agricultural producer and exporter in Europe[171] (representing 20% of the EU's agricultural production[172]) and the world's third biggest exporter of agricultural products.
[173]
Wheat, poultry, dairy, beef, and pork, as well as internationally recognized processed foods are the primary French agricultural exports.
Rosé wines are primarily consumed within the country, but Champagne and Bordeaux wines are major exports, being known worldwide.
EU agriculture subsidies to France have decreased in recent years but still amounted to $8 billion in 2007.
[174] That same year, France sold 33.
4 billion euros of transformed agricultural products.
[175]
Agriculture is an important sector of France's economy: 3.8% of the active population is employed in agriculture, whereas the total agri-food industry made up 4.
2% of French GDP in 2005.
[172]
The Mona Lisa is the World's best known work of art,[176] on permanent display at the Louvre, the World's most visited museum.
[177]
With 83 million foreign tourists in 2012,[11] France is ranked as the first tourist destination in the world, ahead of the US (67 million) and China (58 million).
This 83 million figure excludes people staying less than 24 hours, such as North Europeans crossing France on their way to Spain or Italy.
It is third in income from tourism due to shorter duration of visits.
[178] France has 37 sites inscribed in UNESCO's World Heritage List and features cities of high cultural interest, beaches and seaside resorts, ski resorts, and rural regions that many enjoy for their beauty and tranquillity (green tourism).
Small and picturesque French villages are promoted through the association Les Plus Beaux Villages de France (litt.
"The Most Beautiful Villages of France").
The "Remarkable Gardens" label is a list of the over 200 gardens classified by the French Ministry of Culture.
This label is intended to protect and promote remarkable gardens and parks.
France attracts many religious pilgrims on their way to St.
James, or to Lourdes, a town in the Hautes-Pyrénées that hosts several million visitors a year.
The Mont Saint-Michel is one of the most visited and recognisable landmarks in France. It is one of the 39 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in France.
France, especially Paris, has some of the world's largest and renowned museums, including the Louvre, which is the most visited art museum in the world, the Musée d'Orsay, mostly devoted to impressionism, and Beaubourg, dedicated to Contemporary art.
Disneyland Paris is Europe's most popular theme park, with 15 million combined visitors to the resort's Disneyland Park and Walt Disney Studios Park in 2009.
[179]
With more than 10 millions tourists a year, the French Riviera (or Côte d'Azur), in south-east France, is the second leading tourist destination in the country, after the Paris region.
[180] It benefits from 300 days of sunshine per year, 115 kilometres (71 mi) of coastline and beaches, 18 golf courses, 14 ski resorts and 3,000 restaurants.
[181] Each year the Côte d'Azur hosts 50% of the world's superyacht fleet.
[182]
Another major destination are the Châteaux of the Loire Valley, this World Heritage Site is noteworthy for its architectural heritage, in its historic towns but in particular its castles (châteaux), such as the Châteaux d'Amboise, de Chambord, d'Ussé, de Villandry and Chenonceau.
The most popular tourist sites include: (according to a 2003 ranking[183] visitors per year): Eiffel Tower (6.
2 million), Louvre Museum (5.
7 million), Palace of Versailles (2.
8 million), Musée d'Orsay (2.
1 million), Arc de Triomphe (1.
2 million), Centre Pompidou (1.
2 million), Mont Saint-Michel (1 million), Château de Chambord (711,000), Sainte-Chapelle (683,000), Château du Haut-Kœnigsbourg (549,000), Puy de Dôme (500,000), Musée Picasso (441,000), Carcassonne (362,000).
France derives 75% of its electricity from nuclear power, the highest percentage in the world.[184] Photo of Cattenom Nuclear Power Plant.
Électricité de France (EDF), the main electricity generation and distribution company in France, is also one of the world's largest producers of electricity.
In 2003, it produced 22% of the European Union's electricity, primarily from nuclear power.
France is the smallest emitter of carbon dioxide among the G8, due to its heavy investment in nuclear power.
[185] As a result of large investments in nuclear technology, most electricity produced by France is generated by 59 nuclear power plants (75% in 2012).
[186] In this context, renewable energies are having difficulty taking off.
France also uses hydroelectric dams to produce electricity, such as the Eguzon dam, Étang de Soulcem, and Lac de Vouglans.
The railway network of France, which as of 2008 stretches 29,473 kilometres (18,314 mi)[187] is the second most extensive in Western Europe after that of Germany.
[188] It is operated by the SNCF, and high-speed trains include the Thalys, the Eurostar and TGV, which travels at 320 km/h (199 mph) in commercial use.
[189] The Eurostar, along with the Eurotunnel Shuttle, connects with the United Kingdom through the Channel Tunnel.
Rail connections exist to all other neighbouring countries in Europe, except Andorra.
Intra-urban connections are also well developed with both underground services (Paris, Lyon, Lille, Marseille, Toulouse, Rennes) and tramway services (Nantes, Strasbourg, Bordeaux, Grenoble, Montpellier.
.
.
) complementing bus services.
A TGV Duplex, which can reach a maximum speed of 320 km/h (198.84 mph).
There are approximately 1,027,183 kilometres (638,262 mi) of serviceable roadway in France, ranking it the most extensive network of the European continent.
[190] The Paris region is enveloped with the most dense network of roads and highways that connect it with virtually all parts of the country.
French roads also handle substantial international traffic, connecting with cities in neighbouring Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Spain, Andorra and Monaco.
There is no annual registration fee or road tax; however, usage of the mostly privately owned motorways is through tolls except in the vicinity of large communes.
The new car market is dominated by domestic brands such as Renault (27% of cars sold in France in 2003), Peugeot (20.
1%) and Citroën (13.
5%).
[191] Over 70% of new cars sold in 2004 had diesel engines, far more than contained petrol or LPG engines.
[192] France possesses the Millau Viaduct, the world's tallest bridge,[193] and has built many important bridges such as the Pont de Normandie.
There are 464 airports in France.[79] Charles de Gaulle Airport, located in the vicinity of Paris, is the largest and busiest airport in the country, handling the vast majority of popular and commercial traffic and connecting Paris with virtually all major cities across the world.
Air France is the national carrier airline, although numerous private airline companies provide domestic and international travel services.
There are ten major ports in France, the largest of which is in Marseille,[194] which also is the largest bordering the Mediterranean Sea.
[195][196] 12,261 kilometres (7,619 mi) of waterways traverse France including the Canal du Midi, which connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Atlantic Ocean through the Garonne river.
[79]
France is one of the biggest contributors to the European Space Agency (Ariane 4 launch pictured).
Since the Middle Ages, France has been a major contributor to scientific achievement . Around the beginning of the 11th century Pope Sylvester II, born Gerbert d'Aurillac, reintroduced the abacus and armillary sphere, and introduced Arabic numerals and clocks to northern and western Europe.
[197] The University of Paris, founded in the mid-12th century, is still one of the most important universities in the Western world.
[198] In the 17th century, René Descartes defined a method for the acquisition of scientific knowledge, while Blaise Pascal became famous for his work on probability and fluid mechanics.
They were both key figures of the Scientific revolution, which erupted in Europe during this period.
The Academy of Sciences was founded by Louis XIV to encourage and protect the spirit of French scientific research.
It was at the forefront of scientific developments in Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries.
It is one of the earliest academies of sciences.
The Age of Enlightenment was marked by the work of biologist Buffon and chemist Lavoisier, who discovered the role of oxygen in combustion, while Diderot and D'Alembert published the Encyclopédie, which aimed to give access to "useful knowledge" to the people, a knowledge that they can apply to their everyday life.
[199] With the Industrial Revolution, the 19th century saw spectacular scientific developments in France with scientists such as Augustin Fresnel, founder of modern optics, Sadi Carnot who laid the foundations of thermodynamics, or Louis Pasteur, a pioneer of microbiology.
Other eminent French scientists of the 19th century have their names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower.
Famous French scientists of the 20th century include the mathematician and physicist Henri Poincaré, physicists Henri Becquerel, Pierre and Marie Curie, remained famous for their work on radioactivity, the physicist Paul Langevin or virologist Luc Montagnier, co-discoverer of HIV AIDS.
Hand transplantation was developed on 23 September 1998 in Lyon by a team assembled from different countries around the world including Jean-Michel Dubernard who, shortly thereafter, performed the first successful double hand transplant.
[200] Telesurgery was developed by Jacques Marescaux and his team on 7 September 2001 across the Atlantic Ocean (New-York-Strasbourg, Lindbergh Operation).
[201] A face transplant was first done on 27 November 2005[202][203] by Dr Bernard Devauchelle.
France was the fourth country to achieve nuclear capability[204] and has the third largest nuclear weapons arsenal in the world.
[205] It is also a leader in civilian nuclear technology.
[206][207][208] France was the third nation, after the former USSR and the United States, to launch its own space satellite and remains the biggest contributor to the European Space Agency (ESA).
[209][210][211] The European Airbus Group, formed from the French group Aérospatiale along with DaimlerChrysler Aerospace AG (DASA) and Construcciones Aeronáuticas SA (CASA), designs and develops civil and military aircraft as well as communications systems, missiles, space rockets, helicopters, satellites, and related systems.
From 1970 SNCF, the French national railroad company, has developed the TGV, a high speed train which holds a series of world speed records.
The TGV has been the fastest wheeled train in commercial use since reaching a speed of 574.
[212] Western Europe is now serviced by a network of TGV lines.
As of 2014, 67 French people have been awarded a Nobel Prize[213] and 12 have received the Fields Medal.
[214]
Population density in the French Republic at the 1999 census.
With an estimated total population of around 66.6 million people as of January 2016,[8] with 64.5 million in metropolitan France,[215] France is the 20th most populous country in the world and the third-most populous in Europe.
France is an outlier among developed countries in general, and European countries in particular, in having a fairly high rate of natural population growth: by birth rates alone, France was responsible for almost all natural population growth in the European Union in 2006, with the natural growth rate (excess of births over deaths) rising to 300,000.
[216] This was the highest rate since the end of the baby boom in 1973, and coincides with the rise of the total fertility rate from a nadir of 1.
7 in 1994 to 2.
0 in 2010.
[217][218]
From 2006 to 2011 population growth was on average +0.6% per year.[216] Immigrants are also major contributors to this trend; in 2010, 27% of newborns in metropolitan France had at least one foreign-born parent and 24% had at least one parent born outside of Europe (parents born in overseas territories are considered as born in France).
[219]
Most French people are of Celtic (Gauls) origin, with an admixture of Latin (Romans) and Germanic (Franks) groups.
[220] Different regions reflect this diverse heritage, with notable Breton elements in western France, Aquitanian in the southwest, Scandinavian in the northwest, Alemannic in the northeast and Ligurian influence in the southeast.
Large-scale immigration over the last century and a half has led to a more multicultural society. In 2004, the Institut Montaigne estimated that within Metropolitan France, 51 million people were White (85% of the population), 6 million were North African (10%), 2 million were Black (3.
3%), and 1 million were Asian (1.
7%).
[221][222]
A law originating from the 1789 revolution and reaffirmed in the 1958 French Constitution makes it illegal for the French state to collect data on ethnicity and ancestry.
In 2008, the TeO ("Trajectories and origins") poll conducted jointly by INED and the French National Institute of Statistics[223][224] estimated that 5 million people were of Italian ancestry (the largest immigrant community), followed by 3 million[225][226] to 6 million[227] people of North African ancestry, 2.
5 million people of Sub-Saharan African origin, and 200,000 people of Turkish ancestry.
[228] There are also sizeable minorities of other European ethnic groups, namely Spanish, Portuguese, Romani, Polish, and Greek.
[225][229][230]
It is currently estimated that 40% of the French population is descended at least partially from the different waves of immigration the country has received since the early 20th century;[231] between 1921 and 1935 alone, about 1.
1 million net immigrants came to France.
[232] The next largest wave came in the 1960s, when around 1.
6 million pieds noirs returned to France following the independence of its North African possessions, Algeria and Morocco.
[233][234] They were joined by numerous former colonial subjects from North and West Africa, as well as numerous immigrants from Spain and Portugal.
France remains a major destination for immigrants, accepting about 200,000 legal immigrants annually.
[235] It is also Western Europe's leading recipient of asylum seekers, with an estimated 50,000 applications in 2005 (a 15% decrease from 2004).
[236] The European Union allows free movement between the member states, although France established controls to curb Eastern European migration, and immigration remains a contentious political issue.
In 2008, the INSEE estimated that the total number of foreign-born immigrants was around 5 million (8% of the population), while their French-born descendants numbered 6.
5 million, or 11% of the population.
Thus, nearly a fifth of the country's population were either first or second-generation immigrants, of which more than 5 million where of European origin and 4 million of Maghrebi ancestry.
[237][238][239] In 2008, France granted citizenship to 137,000 persons, mostly to people from Morocco, Algeria and Turkey.
[240]
In 2014 The National Institute of Statistics (INSEE, for its acronym in French) published a study on Thursday, according to which has doubled the number of Spanish immigrants, Portuguese and Italians in France between 2009 and 2012.
According to the French Institute, this increase resulting from the financial crisis that hit several European countries in that period, has pushed up the number of Europeans installed in France.
[241] Statistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107 percent between 2009 and 2012, i.
e.
in this period went from 5300 to 11,000 people.
[241] Of the total of 229,000 foreigners were in France in 2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, British 5%, Spanish 5%, Italians 4%, Germans 4% ; Romanians 3% , 3% Belgians.
[241]
France is a highly urbanized country, with its largest cities (in terms of metropolitan area population in 2013[242]) being Paris (12,405,426 inh.
), Lyon (2,237,676), Marseille (1,734,277), Toulouse (1,291,517), Bordeaux (1,178,335), Lille (1,175,828), Nice (1,004,826), Nantes (908,815), Strasbourg (773,447) and Rennes (700,675).
(Note: There are significant differences between the metropolitan population figures just cited and those in the following table, which only include the core population).
Rural flight was a perennial political issue throughout most of the 20th century.
According to Article 2 of the Constitution, the official language of France is French,[243] a Romance language derived from Latin.
Since 1635, the Académie française has been France's official authority on the French language, although its recommendations carry no legal power.
The French government does not regulate the choice of language in publications by individuals but the use of French is required by law in commercial and workplace communications.
In addition to mandating the use of French in the territory of the Republic, the French government tries to promote French in the European Union and globally through institutions such as La Francophonie.
The perceived threat from anglicisation has prompted efforts to safeguard the position of the French language in France.
Besides French, there exist 77 vernacular minority languages of France, eight spoken in French metropolitan territory and 69 in the French overseas territories.
From the 17th to the mid-20th century, French served as the pre-eminent international language of diplomacy and international affairs as well as a lingua franca among the educated classes of Europe.
[244] The dominant position of French language in international affairs was overtaken by English, since the emergence of the US as a major power.
[51][245][246]
For most of the time in which French served as an international lingua franca, it was not the native language of most Frenchmen: a report in 1794 conducted by Henri Grégoire found that of the country's 25 million people, only three million spoke French natively; the rest spoke one of the country's many regional languages, such as Alsatian, Breton or Occitan.
[247] Through the expansion of public education, in which French was the sole language of instruction, as well as other factors such as increased urbanization and the rise of mass communication, French gradually came to be adopted by virtually the entire population, a process not completed until the 20th century.
As a result of France's extensive colonial ambitions between the 17th and 20th centuries, French was introduced to the Americas, Africa, Polynesia, South-East Asia, and the Caribbean.
French is the second most studied foreign language in the world after English,[248] and is a lingua franca in some regions, notably in Africa.
The legacy of French as a living language outside Europe is mixed: it is nearly extinct in some former French colonies (The Levant, South and Southeast Asia), while creoles and pidgins based on French have emerged in the French departments in the West Indies and the South Pacific (French Polynesia).
On the other hand, many former French colonies have adopted French as an official language, and the total number of French speakers is increasing, especially in Africa.
It is estimated that between 300 million[249] and 500 million[250] people worldwide can speak French, either as a mother tongue or a second language.
Notre-Dame de Reims is the Roman Catholic cathedral where the kings of France were crowned until 1825.
[251]
France is a secular country, and freedom of religion is a constitutional right. French religious policy is based on the concept of laïcité, a strict separation of church and state under which public life is kept completely secular.
Catholicism has been the predominant religion in France for more than a millennium, though it is not as actively practised today as it was.
Among the 47,000 religious buildings in France, 94% are Roman Catholic.
[252] While in 1965, 81% of the French declared themselves to be Catholics, in 2009 this proportion was 64%.
Moreover, while 27% of the French went to Mass once a week or more in 1952, only 5% did so in 2006.
[253] The same survey found that Protestants accounted for 3% of the population, an increase from previous surveys, and 5% adhered to other religions, with the remaining 28% stating they had no religion.
[253] Evangelical Protestantism may be the fastest growing religion in France.
[254]
The French Revolution saw a radical shift in the status of the Catholic Church with the launch of a brutal campaign of de-Christianization.
After the back and forth of Catholic royal and secular republican governments over the 19th century, laïcité was established with the 1905 law on the Separation of the Churches and the State.
[255]
According to a poll in January 2007,[256] only 5% of the French population attended church regularly (10% attend church services regularly among the respondents who did identify themselves as Catholics).
The poll showed[257] 51% identified as being Catholics, 31% identified as being agnostics or atheists (another poll[258] sets the proportion of atheists equal to 27%), 10% identified as being from other religions or being without opinion, 4% identified as Muslim, 3% identified as Protestant, 1% identified as Buddhist, 1% identified as Jewish.
Meanwhile, an independent estimate by the politologist Pierre Bréchon in 2009 concluded that the proportion of Catholics had fallen to 42% while the number of atheists and agnostics had risen to 50%.
[259] According to Eurobarometer poll in 2012 Christianity is the largest religion in France accounting 60% of French citizens.
[260] Catholics are the largest Christian group in France, accounting for 50% of French citizens,[260] while Protestants make up 8%, and Other Christian make up 2%.
Non believer/Agnostic account 20%, Atheist account's 13%, and Muslim 6%.
Estimates of the number of Muslims in France vary widely. In 2003, the French Ministry of the Interior estimated the total number of people of Muslim background to be between 5 and 6 million (8–10%).
[261][262] According to the Pewforum, "In France, proponents of a 2004 law banning the wearing of religious symbols in schools say it protects Muslim girls from being forced to wear a headscarf, but the law also restricts those who want to wear headscarves – or any other "conspicuous" religious symbol, including large Christian crosses and Sikh turbans – as an expression of their faith"[263]
The current Jewish community in France numbers around 600,000 according to the World Jewish Congress and is the largest in Europe.
Since 1905 the French government has followed the principle of laïcité, in which it is prohibited from recognising any specific right to a religious community (except for legacy statutes like that of military chaplains and the local law in Alsace-Moselle).
Instead, it merely recognises religious organisations, according to formal legal criteria that do not address religious doctrine.
Conversely, religious organizations should refrain from intervening in policy-making.
[264] Certain bodies of beliefs such as Scientology, Children of God, the Unification Church, or the Order of the Solar Temple are considered cults ("sectes" in French),[265] and therefore do not have the same status as religions in France.
Secte is considered a pejorative term in France.
[266]
The Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, a teaching hospital in Paris, one of Europe's largest hospitals.[267]
The French health care system is one of universal health care largely financed by government national health insurance.
In its 2000 assessment of world health care systems, the World Health Organization found that France provided the "close to best overall health care" in the world.
[268] The French healthcare system was ranked first worldwide by the World Health Organization in 1997.
[269][270] In 2011, France spent 11.
6% of GDP on health care, or US$4,086 per capita,[271] a figure much higher than the average spent by countries in Europe but less than in the US.
Approximately 77% of health expenditures are covered by government funded agencies.
[272]
Care is generally free for people affected by chronic diseases (affections de longues durées) such as cancer, AIDS or Cystic Fibrosis.
Average life expectancy at birth is 78 years for men and 85 years for women, one of the highest of the European Union.
[273] There are 3.
22 physicians for every 1000 inhabitants in France,[274] and average health care spending per capita was US$4,719 in 2008.
[275] As of 2007, approximately 140,000 inhabitants (0.
4%) of France are living with HIV/AIDS.
[79]
Even if the French have the reputation of being one of the thinnest people in developed countries,[276][277][278][279][280][281] France—like other rich countries—faces an increasing and recent epidemic of obesity, due mostly to the replacement of traditional healthy French cuisine by junk food in French eating habits.
[276][277][282] Nevertheless, the French obesity rate is far below that of the USA (for instance, obesity rate in France is the same that the American once was in the 1970s[277]), and is still the lowest of Europe,[279][282] but it is now regarded by the authorities as one of the main public health issues[283] and is fiercely fought; rates of childhood obesity are slowing in France, while continuing to grow in other countries.
[284]
The National and University Library on the campus of the University of Strasbourg.
In 1802, Napoleon created the lycée.[285] Nevertheless, it is Jules Ferry who is considered to be the father of the French modern school, which is free, secular, and compulsory until the age of 13 since 1882[286] (school attendance in France is now compulsory until the age of 16[287]).
Nowadays, the schooling system in France is centralized, and is composed of three stages, primary education, secondary education, and higher education.
The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks France's education as the 25th best in the world, being neither significantly higher nor lower than the OECD average.
[288] Primary and secondary education are predominantly public, run by the Ministry of National Education.
Higher education in France is divided between public universities and the prestigious and selective Grandes écoles, such as Sciences Po Paris for Political studies, HEC Paris for Economics, Polytechnique and the École nationale supérieure des mines de Paris that produces high-profile engineers, or the École nationale d'administration for careers in the great corps of the State.
The Grandes écoles have been criticised for alleged elitism,[289] nevertheless they have produced many if not most of France's high-ranking civil servants, CEOs, and politicians.
Since higher education is funded by the state, the fees are very low; the tuition varies from €150 to €700 depending on the university and the different levels of education.
(licence, master, doctorate).
One can therefore get a master's degree (in 5 years) for about €750–3,500.
The tuition in public engineering schools is comparable to universities, albeit a little higher (around €700).
However it can reach €7000 a year for private engineering schools, and some business schools, which are all private or partially private, charge up to €15000 a year.
Health insurance for students is free until the age of 20.
Château de Chenonceau in the Loire valley
France has been a center of Western cultural development for centuries. Many French artists have been among the most renowned of their time, and France is still recognized in the world for its rich cultural tradition.
The successive political regimes have always promoted artistic creation, and the creation of the Ministry of Culture in 1959 helped preserve the cultural heritage of the country and make it available to the public.
The Ministry of Culture has been very active since its creation, granting subsidies to artists, promoting French culture in the world, supporting festivals and cultural events, protecting historical monuments.
The French government also succeeded in maintaining a cultural exception to defend audiovisual products made in the country.
France receives the highest number of tourists per year, largely thanks to the numerous cultural establishments and historical buildings implanted all over the territory.
It counts 1,200 museums welcoming more than 50 million people annually.
[290] The most important cultural sites are run by the government, for instance through the public agency Centre des monuments nationaux, which is responsible for approximately 85 national historical monuments.
The 43,180 buildings protected as historical monuments include mainly residences (many castles, or châteaux in French) and religious buildings (cathedrals, basilicas, churches, etc.
), but also statutes, memorials and gardens.
The UNESCO inscribed 41 sites in France on the World Heritage List.
[291]
Claude Monet founded the Impressionist movement (Femme avec un parasol, 1886, Musée d'Orsay).
The origins of French art were very much influenced by Flemish art and by Italian art at the time of the Renaissance.
Jean Fouquet, the most famous medieval French painter, is said to have been the first to travel to Italy and experience the Early Renaissance at first hand.
The Renaissance painting School of Fontainebleau was directly inspired by Italian painters such as Primaticcio and Rosso Fiorentino, who both worked in France.
Two of the most famous French artists of the time of Baroque era, Nicolas Poussin and Claude Lorrain, lived in Italy.
The 17th century was the period when French painting became prominent and individualized itself through classicism.
Louis XIV's prime minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert founded in 1648 the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture to protect these artists, and in 1666 he created the still-active French Academy in Rome to have direct relations with Italian artists.
Le Penseur by Auguste Rodin (1902), Musée Rodin, Paris.
French artists developed the rococo style in the 18th century, as a more intimate imitation of old baroque style, the works of the court-endorsed artists Antoine Watteau, François Boucher and Jean-Honoré Fragonard being the most representative in the country.
The French Revolution brought great changes, as Napoleon favoured artists of neoclassic style such as Jacques-Louis David and the highly influential Académie des Beaux-Arts defined the style known as Academism.
At this time France had become a centre of artistic creation, the first half of the 19th century being dominated by two successive movements, at first Romanticism with Théodore Géricault and Eugène Delacroix, and Realism with Camille Corot, Gustave Courbet and Jean-François Millet, a style that eventually evolved into Naturalism.
In the second part of the 19th century, France's influence over painting became even more important, with the development of new styles of painting such as Impressionism and Symbolism.
The most famous impressionist painters of the period were Camille Pissarro, Édouard Manet, Edgar Degas, Claude Monet and Auguste Renoir.
[292] The second generation of impressionist-style painters, Paul Cézanne, Paul Gauguin, Toulouse-Lautrec and Georges Seurat, were also at the avant-garde of artistic evolutions,[293] as well as the fauvist artists Henri Matisse, André Derain and Maurice de Vlaminck.
[294][295]
At the beginning of the 20th century, Cubism was developed by Georges Braque and the Spanish painter Pablo Picasso, living in Paris.
Other foreign artists also settled and worked in or near Paris, such as Vincent van Gogh, Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani and Wassily Kandinsky.
Many museums in France are entirely or partly devoted to sculptures and painting works. A huge collection of old masterpieces created before or during the 18th century are displayed in the state-owned Musée du Louvre, such as Mona Lisa, also known as La Joconde.
While the Louvre Palace has been for a long time a museum, the Musée d'Orsay was inaugurated in 1986 in the old railway station Gare d'Orsay, in a major reorganization of national art collections, to gather French paintings from the second part of the 19th century (mainly Impressionism and Fauvism movements).
[296][297]
Modern works are presented in the Musée National d'Art Moderne, which moved in 1976 to the Centre Georges Pompidou.
These three state-owned museums welcome close to 17 million people a year.
[298] Other national museums hosting paintings include the Grand Palais (1.
3 million visitors in 2008), but there are also many museums owned by cities, the most visited being the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris (0.
8 million entries in 2008), which hosts contemporary works.
[298]
Outside Paris, all the large cities have a Museum of Fine Arts with a section dedicated to European and French painting.
Some of the finest collections are in Lyon, Lille, Rouen, Dijon, Rennes and Grenoble.
Saint Louis' Sainte Chapelle represents the French impact on religious architecture.
Opéra Garnier, Paris, a symbol of the French Second Empire style
During the Middle Ages, many fortified castles were built by feudal nobles to mark their powers. Some French castles that survived are Chinon, Château d'Angers, the massive Château de Vincennes and the so-called Cathar castles.
During this era, France had been using Romanesque architecture like most of Western Europe.
Some of the greatest examples of Romanesque churches in France are the Saint Sernin Basilica in Toulouse, the largest romanesque church in Europe,[299] and the remains of the Cluniac Abbey.
The Gothic architecture, originally named Opus Francigenum meaning " French work ",[300] was born in Île-de-France and was the first French style of architecture to be copied in all Europe.
[301] Northern France is the home of some of the most important Gothic cathedrals and basilicas, the first of these being the Saint Denis Basilica (used as the royal necropolis); other important French Gothic cathedrals are Notre-Dame de Chartres and Notre-Dame d'Amiens.
The kings were crowned in another important Gothic church: Notre-Dame de Reims.
[302] Aside from churches, Gothic Architecture had been used for many religious palaces, the most important one being the Palais des Papes in Avignon.
The final victory in the Hundred Years' War marked an important stage in the evolution of French architecture.
It was the time of the French Renaissance and several artists from Italy were invited to the French court; many residential palaces were built in the Loire Valley.
Such residential castles were the Château de Chambord, the Château de Chenonceau, or the Château d'Amboise.
Following the renaissance and the end of the Middle Ages, Baroque architecture replaced the traditional Gothic style.
However, in France, baroque architecture found a greater success in the secular domain than in a religious one.
[303] In the secular domain, the Palace of Versailles has many baroque features.
Jules Hardouin Mansart, who designed the extensions to Versailles, was one of the most influential French architect of the baroque era; he is famous for his dome at Les Invalides.
[304] Some of the most impressive provincial baroque architecture is found in places that were not yet French such as the Place Stanislas in Nancy.
On the military architectural side, Vauban designed some of the most efficient fortresses in Europe and became an influential military architect; as a result, imitations of his works can be found all over Europe, the Americas, Russia and Turkey.
The world's most visited paid monument,[307] the Eiffel Tower is an icon of both Paris and France.
After the Revolution, the Republicans favoured Neoclassicism although neoclassicism was introduced in France prior to the revolution with such building as the Parisian Pantheon or the Capitole de Toulouse.
Built during the first French Empire, the Arc de Triomphe and Sainte Marie-Madeleine represent the best example of Empire style architecture.
[308]
Under Napoleon III, a new wave of urbanism and architecture was given birth; extravagant buildings such as the neo-baroque Palais Garnier were built.
The urban planning of the time was very organised and rigorous; for example, Haussmann's renovation of Paris.
The architecture associated to this era is named Second Empire in English, the term being taken from the Second French Empire.
At this time there was a strong Gothic resurgence across Europe and in France; the associated architect was Eugène Viollet-le-Duc.
In the late 19th century, Gustave Eiffel designed many bridges, such as Garabit viaduct, and remains one of the most influential bridge designers of his time, although he is best remembered for the iconic Eiffel Tower.
In the 20th century, French-Swiss architect Le Corbusier designed several buildings in France. More recently, French architects have combined both modern and old architectural styles.
The Louvre Pyramid is an example of modern architecture added to an older building.
The most difficult buildings to integrate within French cities are skyscrapers, as they are visible from afar.
For instance, in Paris, since 1977, new buildings had to be under 37 meters, or 121 feet.
[309] France's largest financial district is La Defense, where a significant number of skyscrapers are located.
[310] Other massive buildings that are a challenge to integrate into their environment are large bridges; an example of the way this has been done is the Millau Viaduct.
Some famous modern French architects include Jean Nouvel, Dominique Perrault, Christian de Portzamparc or Paul Andreu.
The earliest French literature dates from the Middle Ages, when what is now known as modern France did not have a single, uniform language.
There were several languages and dialects and writers used their own spelling and grammar.
Some authors of French mediaeval texts are unknown, such as Tristan and Iseult and Lancelot-Grail.
Other authors are known, for example Chrétien de Troyes and Duke William IX of Aquitaine, who wrote in Occitan.
Much mediaeval French poetry and literature were inspired by the legends of the Matter of France, such as The Song of Roland and the various chansons de geste.
The Roman de Renart, written in 1175 by Perrout de Saint Cloude, tells the story of the mediaeval character Reynard ('the Fox') and is another example of early French writing.
An important 16th-century writer was François Rabelais, whose novel Gargantua and Pantagruel has remained famous and appreciated until now.
Michel de Montaigne was the other major figure of the French literature during that century.
His most famous work, Essais, created the literary genre of the essay.
[311] French poetry during that century was embodied by Pierre de Ronsard and Joachim du Bellay.
Both writers founded the La Pléiade literary movement.
During the 17th century, Madame de La Fayette published anonymously La Princesse de Clèves, a novel that is considered to be one of the very first psychological novels of all times.
[312] Jean de La Fontaine is one of the most famous fabulist of that time, as he wrote hundreds of fables, some being far more famous than others, such as The Ant and the Grasshopper.
Generations of French pupils had to learn his fables, that were seen as helping teaching wisdom and common sense to the young people.
Some of his verses have entered the popular language to become proverbs.
French literary figures. Clockwise from top left: Molière is the most played author in the Comédie-Française;[313] Victor Hugo is one of the most important French novelists and poets, and is sometimes seen as the greatest French writer of all time.
[314] 19th-century poet, writer, and translator Charles Baudelaire; 20th-century philosopher and novelist Jean-Paul Sartre.
Jean Racine, whose incredible mastery of the alexandrine and of the French language has been praised for centuries, created plays such as Phèdre or Britannicus.
He is, along with Pierre Corneille (Le Cid) and Molière, considered as one of the three great dramatists of the France's golden age.
Molière, who is deemed to be one of the greatest masters of comedy of the Western literature,[315] wrote dozens of plays, including Le Misanthrope, L'Avare, Le Malade imaginaire, and Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme.
His plays have been so popular around the world that French language is sometimes dubbed as "the language of Molière" (la langue de Molière),[316] just like English is considered as "the language of Shakespeare".
French literature and poetry flourished even more in the 18th and 19th centuries. Denis Diderot's best-known works are Jacques the Fatalist and Rameau's Nephew.
He is however best known for being the main redactor of the Encyclopédie, whose aim was to sum up all the knowledge of his century (in fields such as arts, sciences, languages, philosophy) and to present them to the people, in order to fight ignorance and obscurantism.
During that same century, Charles Perrault was a prolific writer of famous children's fairy tales including Puss in Boots, Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty and Bluebeard.
At the start of the 19th century, symbolist poetry was an important movement in French literature, with poets such as Charles Baudelaire, Paul Verlaine and Stéphane Mallarmé.
[317]
The 19th century saw the writings of many renowned French authors. Victor Hugo is sometimes seen as "the greatest French writer of all times"[314] for excelling in all literary genres.
The preface of his play Cromwell is considered to be the manifesto of the Romantic movement.
Les Contemplations and La Légende des siècles are considered as "poetic masterpieces",[318] Hugo's verse having been compared to that of Shakespeare, Dante and Homer.
[318] His novel Les Misérables is widely seen as one of the greatest novel ever written[319] and The Hunchback of Notre Dame has remained immensely popular.
Other major authors of that century include Alexandre Dumas (The Three Musketeers and The Count of Monte-Cristo), Jules Verne (Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea), Émile Zola (Les Rougon-Macquart), Honoré de Balzac (La Comédie humaine), Guy de Maupassant, Théophile Gautier and Stendhal (The Red and the Black, The Charterhouse of Parma), whose works are among the most well known in France and the world.
The Prix Goncourt is a French literary prize first awarded in 1903.[320] Important writers of the 20th century include Marcel Proust, Louis-Ferdinand Céline, Albert Camus, and Jean-Paul Sartre.
Antoine de Saint Exupéry wrote Little Prince, which has remained popular for decades with children and adults around the world.
[321] As of 2014, French authors had more Literature Nobel Prizes than those of any other nation.
[322] The first Nobel Prize in Literature was a French author, while France's latest Nobel prize in literature is Patrick Modiano, who was awarded the prize in 2014.
[322] Jean-Paul Sartre was also the first nominee in the committee's history to refuse the prize in 1964.
[322]
Medieval philosophy was dominated by Scholasticism until the emergence of Humanism in the Renaissance.
Modern philosophy began in France in the 17th century with the philosophy of René Descartes, Blaise Pascal, and Nicolas Malebranche.
Descartes revitalised Western philosophy, which had been declined after the Greek and Roman eras.
[323] His Meditations on First Philosophy changed the primary object of philosophical thought and raised some of the most fundamental problems for foreigners such as Spinoza, Leibniz, Hume, Berkeley, and Kant.
René Descartes, founder of modern philosophy.
During the 18th century, French philosophers produced one of the most important works of the Age of Enlightenment.
In The Spirit of the Laws, Baron de Montesquieu theorized the principle of separation of powers, which has been implemented in all liberal democracies since it was first applied in the United States.
In The Social Contract, Jean-Jacques Rousseau openly criticized the European divine right monarchies and strongly affirmed the principle of the sovereignty of the people.
Voltaire came to embody the Enlightenment with his defence of civil liberties, such as the right to a free trial and freedom of religion.
19th-century French thought was targeted at responding to the social malaise following the French Revolution.
Rationalist philosophers such as Victor Cousin and Auguste Comte, who called for a new social doctrine, were opposed by reactionary thinkers such as Joseph de Maistre, Louis de Bonald and Lamennais, who blamed the rationalist rejection of traditional order.
De Maistre is considered, together with the Englishman Edmund Burke, one of the founders of European conservatism, while Comte is regarded as the founder of positivism and sociology.
In the early 20th century, French spiritualist thinkers such as Maine de Biran, Henri Bergson and Louis Lavelle influenced Anglo-Saxon thought, including the Americans Charles Sanders Peirce and William James, and the Englishman Alfred North Whitehead.
In the late 20th century, partly influenced by German phenomenology and existentialism, postmodern philosophy began in France, with notable post-structuralist thinkers including Jean-François Lyotard, Jean Baudrillard, Jacques Derrida, Jacques Lacan, Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze.
Serge Gainsbourg, one of the world's most influential popular musicians.[324]
France has a long and varied musical history. It experienced a golden age in the 17th century thanks to Louis XIV, who employed a number of talented musicians and composers in the royal court.
The most renowned composers of this period include Marc-Antoine Charpentier, François Couperin, Michel-Richard Delalande, Jean-Baptiste Lully and Marin Marais, all of them composers at the court.
After the death of the "Roi Soleil", French musical creation lost dynamism, but in the next century the music of Jean-Philippe Rameau reached some prestige, and today he is still one of the most renowned French composers.
Rameau became the dominant composer of French opera and the leading French composer for the harpsichord.
[325]
French composers played an important role during the music of the 19th and early 20th century, which is considered to be the Romantic music era.
Romantic music emphasized a surrender to nature, a fascination with the past and the supernatural, the exploration of unusual, strange and surprising sounds, and a focus on national identity.
This period was also a golden age for operas.
French composers from the Romantic era included: Hector Berlioz (best known for his Symphonie fantastique), Georges Bizet (best known for Carmen, which has become one of the most popular and frequently performed operas), Gabriel Fauré (best known for his Pavane, Requiem, and nocturnes), Charles Gounod (best known for his Ave Maria and his opera Faust), Jacques Offenbach (best known for his 100 operettas of the 1850s–1870s and his uncompleted opera The Tales of Hoffmann), Édouard Lalo (best known for his Symphonie espagnole for violin and orchestra and his Cello Concerto in D minor), Jules Massenet (best known for his operas, of which he wrote more than thirty, the most frequently staged are Manon (1884) and Werther (1892)) and Camille Saint-Saëns (he has many frequently-performed works, including The Carnival of the Animals, Danse macabre, Samson and Delilah (Opera), Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso, and his Symphony No.
Later came precursors of modern classical music. Érik Satie was a key member of the early 20th century Parisian avant-garde, best known for his Gymnopédies.
Francis Poulenc's best known works are his piano suite Trois mouvements perpétuels (1919), the ballet Les biches (1923), the Concert champêtre (1928) for harpsichord and orchestra, the opera Dialogues des Carmélites (1957), and the Gloria (1959) for soprano, choir and orchestra.
Maurice Ravel and Claude Debussy are the most prominent figures associated with Impressionist music.
Debussy was among the most influential composers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and his use of non-traditional scales and chromaticism influenced many composers who followed.
[326] Debussy's music is noted for its sensory content and frequent usage of atonality.
The two composers invented new musical forms[327][328][329][330] and new sounds.
Ravel's piano compositions, such as Jeux d'eau, Miroirs, Le tombeau de Couperin and Gaspard de la nuit, demand considerable virtuosity.
His mastery of orchestration is evident in the Rapsodie espagnole, Daphnis et Chloé, his arrangement of Modest Mussorgsky's Pictures at an Exhibition and his orchestral work Boléro (1928).
More recently, at the middle of the 20th century, Maurice Ohana, Pierre Schaeffer and Pierre Boulez contributed to the evolutions of contemporary classical music.
[331]
French music then followed the rapid emergence of pop and rock music at the middle of the 20th century.
Although English-speaking creations achieved popularity in the country, French pop music, known as chanson française, has also remained very popular.
Among the most important French artists of the century are Édith Piaf, Georges Brassens, Léo Ferré, Charles Aznavour and Serge Gainsbourg.
Although there are very few rock bands in France compared to English-speaking countries,[332] bands such as Noir Désir, Mano Negra, Niagara, Les Rita Mitsouko and more recently Superbus, Phoenix and Gojira[333] have reached worldwide popularity.
Other French artists with international careers have been popular in several countries, for example female singers Dalida, Mireille Mathieu, Mylène Farmer[333] and Nolwenn Leroy,[334] electronic music pioneers Jean-Michel Jarre, Laurent Garnier and Bob Sinclar, and later Martin Solveig and David Guetta.
In the 1990s and 2000s (decade), electronic duos Daft Punk, Justice and Air also reached worldwide popularity and contributed to the reputation of modern electronic music in the world.
[333][335][336]
Among current musical events and institutions in France, many are dedicated to classical music and operas.
The most prestigious institutions are the state-owned Paris National Opera (with its two sites Palais Garnier and Opéra Bastille), the Opéra National de Lyon, the Théâtre du Châtelet in Paris, the Théâtre du Capitole in Toulouse and the Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux.
As for music festivals, there are several events organized, the most popular being the Eurockéennes and Rock en Seine.
The Fête de la Musique, imitated by many foreign cities, was first launched by the French government in 1982.
[337][338] Major music halls and venues in France include Le Zénith sites present in many cities and other places in Paris (Paris Olympia, Théâtre Mogador, Élysée Montmartre, etc.
).
A Palme d'Or from the Cannes Film Festival, the world's most prestigious and publicized film festival.
[339][340][341]
France has historical and strong links with cinema, with two Frenchmen, Auguste and Louis Lumière (known as the Lumière Brothers) having created cinema in 1895.
[342] Several important cinematic movements, including the late 1950s and 1960s Nouvelle Vague, began in the country.
It is noted for having a particularly strong film industry, due in part to protections afforded by the French government.
[343] France remains a leader in filmmaking, as of 2006 producing more films than any other European country.
[344] The nation also hosts the Cannes Festival, one of the most important and famous film festivals in the world.
[345][346]
Apart from its strong and innovative film tradition, France has also been a gathering spot for artists from across Europe and the world.
For this reason, French cinema is sometimes intertwined with the cinema of foreign nations.
Directors from nations such as Poland (Roman Polanski, Krzysztof Kieślowski, and Andrzej Żuławski), Argentina (Gaspar Noé and Edgardo Cozarinsky), Russia (Alexandre Alexeieff, Anatole Litvak), Austria (Michael Haneke), and Georgia (Géla Babluani, Otar Iosseliani) are prominent in the ranks of French cinema.
Conversely, French directors have had prolific and influential careers in other countries, such as Luc Besson, Jacques Tourneur, or Francis Veber in the United States.
Although the French film market is dominated by Hollywood, France is the only nation in the world where American films make up the smallest share of total film revenues, at 50%, compared with 77% in Germany and 69% in Japan.
[347] French films account for 35% of the total film revenues of France, which is the highest percentage of national film revenues in the developed world outside the United States, compared to 14% in Spain and 8% in the UK.
[347] France is in 2013 the 2nd exporter of films in the world after the United States.
[348]
Until recently, France had for centuries been the cultural center of the world,[244] although its dominant position has been surpassed by the United States.
Subsequently, France takes steps in protecting and promoting its culture, becoming a leading advocate of the cultural exception.
[349] The nation succeeded in convincing all EU members to refuse to include culture and audiovisuals in the list of liberalized sectors of the WTO in 1993.
[350] Moreover, this decision was confirmed in a voting in the UNESCO in 2005, and the principle of "cultural exception" won an overwhelming victory: 198 countries voted for it, only 2 countries, the U.
S and Israel, voted against it.
[351]
Chanel's headquarters on the Place Vendôme, Paris.
Fashion has been an important industry and cultural export of France since the 17th century, and modern "haute couture" originated in Paris in the 1860s.
Today, Paris, along with London, Milan, and New York City, is considered one of the world's fashion capitals, and the city is home or headquarters to many of the premier fashion houses.
The expression Haute couture is, in France, a legally protected name, guaranteeing certain quality standards.
The association of France with fashion and style (French: la mode) dates largely to the reign of Louis XIV[352] when the luxury goods industries in France came increasingly under royal control and the French royal court became, arguably, the arbiter of taste and style in Europe.
But France renewed its dominance of the high fashion (French: couture or haute couture) industry in the years 1860–1960 through the establishing of the great couturier houses such as Chanel, Dior, and Givenchy.
The French perfume industry is world leader in its sector and is centered on the town of Grasse.
[353]
In the 1960s, the elitist "Haute couture" came under criticism from France's youth culture. In 1966, the designer Yves Saint Laurent broke with established Haute Couture norms by launching a prêt-à-porter ("ready to wear") line and expanding French fashion into mass manufacturing.
With a greater focus on marketing and manufacturing, new trends were established by Sonia Rykiel, Thierry Mugler, Claude Montana, Jean-Paul Gaultier and Christian Lacroix in the 1970s and 1980s.
The 1990s saw a conglomeration of many French couture houses under luxury giants and multinationals such as LVMH.
Le Figaro was founded in 1826; many of France's most prominent authors have written in its columns over the decades, and it is still considered a newspaper of record.
[354]
Compared to other developed countries, the French do not spend much time reading newspapers, due to the popularity of broadcast media.
Best-selling daily national newspapers in France are Le Parisien Aujourd'hui en France (with 460,000 sold daily), Le Monde and Le Figaro, with around 300,000 copies sold daily, but also L'Équipe, dedicated to sports coverage.
[355] In the past years, free dailies made a breakthrough, with Metro, 20 Minutes and Direct Plus distributed at more than 650,000 copies respectively.
[356] However, the widest circulations are reached by regional daily Ouest France with more than 750,000 copies sold, and the 50 other regional papers have also high sales.
[357][358] The sector of weekly magazines is stronger and diversified with more than 400 specialized weekly magazines published in the country.
The most influential news magazines are the left-wing Le Nouvel Observateur, centrist L'Express and right-wing Le Point (more than 400.
000 copies),[360] but the highest circulation for weeklies is reached by TV magazines and by women's magazines, among them Marie Claire and ELLE, which have foreign versions.
Influential weeklies also include investigative and satirical papers Le Canard Enchaîné and Charlie Hebdo, as well as Paris Match.
Like in most industrialized nations, the print media have been affected by a severe crisis in the past decade.
In 2008, the government launched a major initiative to help the sector reform and become financially independent,[361][362] but in 2009 it had to give 600,000 euros to help the print media cope with the economic crisis, in addition to existing subsidies.
In 1974, after years of centralized monopoly on radio and television, the governmental agency ORTF was split into several national institutions, but the three already-existing TV channels and four national radio stations[364][365] remained under state-control.
It was only in 1981 that the government allowed free broadcasting in the territory, ending state monopoly on radio.
[365] French television was partly liberalized in the next two decade with the creation of several commercial channels, mainly thanks to cable and satellite television.
In 2005 the national service Télévision Numérique Terrestre introduced digital television all over the territory, allowing the creation of other channels.
The four existing national channels are now owned by state-owned consortium France Télévisions, while public broadcasting group Radio France run five national radio stations.
Among these public media are Radio France Internationale, which broadcasts programs in French all over the world, and Franco-German TV channel TV5 Monde.
In 2006, the government created global news channel France 24.
Long-established TV channels TF1 (privatized in 1987), France 2 and France 3 have the highest shares, while radio stations RTL, Europe 1 and state-owned France Inter are the least listened to.
Marianne, in a painting by Eugène Delacroix, La Liberté guidant le peuple (Liberty Leading the People) (1830)
According to a BBC poll in 2010, based on 29,977 responses in 28 countries, France is globally seen as a positive influence in the world's affairs: 49% have a positive view of the country's influence, whereas 19% have a negative view.
[366][367] The Nation Brand Index of 2008 suggested that France has the second best international reputation, only behind Germany.
[368]
A Gallic rooster on top of a war memorial in La Rochelle
According to a poll in 2011, the French were found to have the highest level of religious tolerance and to be the country where the highest proportion of the population defines its identity primarily in term of nationality and not religion.
[369] 69% of French have a favourable view of the US, making France one of the most pro-American countries in the world.
[370]
In January 2010, the magazine International Living ranked France as "best country to live in", ahead of 193 other countries, for the fifth year running.
[371][372]
The French Revolution continues to permeate the country's collective memory. The tricolour flag, the anthem "La Marseillaise", and the motto Liberté, egalité, fraternité, defined in Title 1 of the Constitution as national symbols, all emerged during the cultural ferment of the early revolution, along with Marianne, a common national personification.
In addition, Bastille Day, the national holiday, commemorates the storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789.
[373]
A common and traditional symbol of the French people is the Gallic rooster. Its origins date back to Antiquity, since the Latin word Gallus meant both "rooster" and "inhabitant of Gaul".
Then this figure gradually became the most widely shared representation of the French, used by French monarchs, then by the Revolution and under the successive republican regimes as representation of the national identity, used for some stamps and coins.
[374]
Foie gras with mustard seeds and green onions in duck jus. Foie gras belongs to the protected gastronomical heritage of France.
[375]
French cuisine is renowned for being one of the finest in the world.[376][377] According to the regions, traditional recipes are different, the North of the country prefers to use butter as the preferred fat for cooking, whereas olive oil is more commonly used in the South.
[378] Moreover, each region of France has iconic traditional specialities : Cassoulet in the Southwest, Choucroute in Alsace, Quiche in the Lorraine region, Beef bourguignon in the Bourgogne, provençal Tapenade, etc.
France's most renowned products are wines,[379] including Champagne, Bordeaux, Bourgogne, and Beaujolais as well as a large variety of different cheeses, such as Camembert, Roquefort and Brie.
There are more than 400 different varieties.
[380][381]
A meal often consists of three courses, hors d'œuvre or entrée (introductory course, sometimes soup), plat principal (main course), fromage (cheese course) and/or dessert, sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert.
Hors d'œuvres include terrine de saumon au basilic, lobster bisque, foie gras, French onion soup or a croque monsieur.
The plat principal could include a pot au feu or steak frites.
The dessert could be mille-feuille pastry, a macaron, an éclair, crème brûlée, mousse au chocolat, crêpes, or Café liégeois.
French cuisine is also regarded as a key element of the quality of life and the attractiveness of France.
[372] A French publication, the Michelin guide, awards Michelin stars for excellence to a select few establishments.
[382] The acquisition or loss of a star can have dramatic effects on the success of a restaurant.
By 2006, the Michelin Guide had awarded 620 stars to French restaurants, at that time more than any other country, although the guide also inspects more restaurants in France than in any other country (by 2010, Japan was awarded as many Michelin stars as France, despite having half the number of Michelin inspectors working there).
[383][384]
French wines are usually made to accompany French cuisine
Starting in 1903, the Tour de France is the oldest and most prestigious of Grands Tours, and the world's most famous cycling race.
[385]
Popular sports played in France include football, judo, tennis[386] and rugby union.[387] France has hosted events such as the 1938 and 1998 FIFA World Cups,[388] and the 2007 Rugby World Cup.
[389] France will host UEFA Euro 2016.
The Stade de France in Saint-Denis is France's largest stadium and was the venue for the 1998 FIFA World Cup and 2007 Rugby World Cup finals.
Since 1903, France hosts the annual Tour de France, the most famous road bicycle race in the world.
[390][391] France is famous for its 24 Hours of Le Mans sports car endurance race.
[392] Several major tennis tournaments take place in France, including the Paris Masters and the French Open, one of the four Grand Slam tournaments.
French martial arts include Savate and Fencing.
France has a close association with the Modern Olympic Games; it was a French aristocrat, Baron Pierre de Coubertin, who suggested the Games' revival, at the end of the 19th century.
[393][394] After Athens was awarded the first Games, in reference to the Olympics' Greek origins, Paris hosted the second Games in 1900.
[395] Paris was the first home of the International Olympic Committee, before it moved to Lausanne.
[396] Since 1900, France has hosted the Olympics on 4 further occasions: the 1924 Summer Olympics, again in Paris[394] and three Winter Games (1924 in Chamonix, 1968 in Grenoble and 1992 in Albertville).
[394]
The Stade de France was built for the 1998 FIFA World Cup, and is listed as a UEFA category four stadium.
Both the national football team and the national rugby union team are nicknamed "Les Bleus" in reference to the team's shirt colour as well as the national French tricolour flag.
Football is the most popular sport in France, with over 1,800,000 registered players, and over 18,000 registered clubs.
[397] The football team is among the most successful in the world, particularly at the start of the 21st century, with one FIFA World Cup victory in 1998,[398] one FIFA World Cup second place in 2006,[399] and two UEFA European Championships in 1984[400] and 2000.
[401] The top national football club competition is Ligue 1.
France has produced some of the greatest players in the world, including three time FIFA World Player of the Year Zinedine Zidane, three time Ballon d'Or recipient Michel Platini, record holder for most goals scored at a World Cup Just Fontaine, first football player to receive the Légion d'honneur Raymond Kopa, and the all-time leading goalscorer for the French national team Thierry Henry.
Rugby union is popular, particularly in Paris and the southwest of France.[403] The national rugby union team has competed at every Rugby World Cup, and takes part in the annual Six Nations Championship.
Stemming from a strong domestic league, the French rugby team has won 16 Six Nations Championships, including 8 grand slams; and has reached the semi-final of the Rugby World Cup 6 times and the final 3 times.
Rugby league in France is a sport that is most popular in the south, in cities such as Perpignan and Toulouse.
The Catalans Dragons currently play in the Super League, which is the top tier rugby league competition in Europe.
The Elite One Championship is the professional competition for rugby league clubs in France.
In recent decades, France has produced world-elite basketball players, most notably Tony Parker. The French National Basketball Team won gold at the FIBA EuroBasket 2013.
The national team has won two Olympic Silver Medals: in 2000 and 1948.
Germany (/ˈdʒɜːrməni/; German: Deutschland [ˈdɔʏtʃlant]), officially the Federal Republic of Germany (German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland, About this sound listen ),[e][6] is a federal parliamentary republic in West-Central Europe.
It includes 16 constituent states and covers an area of 357,021 square kilometres (137,847 sq mi) with a largely temperate seasonal climate.
Its capital and largest city is Berlin.
With about 81.
5 million inhabitants, Germany is the most populous member state in the European Union.
After the United States, it is the second most popular migration destination in the world.
[7]
Various Germanic tribes have occupied the northern parts of current Germany since classical antiquity.
A region named Germania was documented before 100 AD.
During the Migration Period the Germanic tribes expanded southward.
Beginning in the 10th century, German territories formed a central part of the Holy Roman Empire.
[8] During the 16th century, northern German regions became the centre of the Protestant Reformation.
The rise of Pan-Germanism inside the German Confederation resulted in the unification of many of the German states in 1871 into the Prussian-dominated German Empire.
After World War I and the German Revolution of 1918–1919, the Empire was replaced by the parliamentary Weimar Republic.
The establishment of the national socialist dictatorship in 1933 led to World War II and systematic genocide.
After 1945, Germany split into two states, East Germany and West Germany.
In 1990, the country was reunified.
[9]
In the 21st century, Germany is a great power and has the world's fourth-largest economy by nominal GDP, as well as the fifth-largest by PPP.
As a global leader in several industrial and technological sectors, it is both the world's third-largest exporter and importer of goods.
Germany is a developed country with a very high standard of living sustained by a skilled and productive society.
It upholds a social security and universal health care system, environmental protection and a tuition-free university education.
[10]
Germany was a founding member of the European Union in 1993. It is part of the Schengen Area, and became a co-founder of the Eurozone in 1999.
Germany is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the G8, the G20, and the OECD.
The national military expenditure is the 9th highest in the world.
Known for its rich cultural history, Germany has been continuously the home of influential artists, philosophers, musicians, sportsmen, entrepreneurs, scientists and inventors.
2.1 Germanic tribes and Frankish Empire
2.3 German Confederation and Empire
2.4 Weimar Republic and Nazi Germany
2.6 German reunification and the EU
The English word Germany derives from the Latin Germania, which came into use after Julius Caesar adopted it for the peoples east of the Rhine.
[11] The German term Deutschland, originally diutisciu land ("the German lands") is derived from deutsch (cf.
dutch), descended from Old High German diutisc "popular" (i.
e.
belonging to the diot or diota "people"), originally used to distinguish the language of the common people from Latin and its Romance descendants.
This in turn descends from Proto-Germanic *þiudiskaz "popular" (see also the Latinised form Theodiscus), derived from *þeudō, descended from Proto-Indo-European *tewtéh₂- "people".
[12]
The Nebra sky disk is dated to c. 1600 BC.
The discovery of the Mauer 1 mandible shows that ancient humans were present in Germany at least 600,000 years ago.
[13] The oldest complete hunting weapons found anywhere in the world were discovered in a coal mine in Schöningen where three 380,000-year-old wooden javelins 6–7.
5 feet long were unearthed.
[14] The Neander Valley was the location where the first ever non-modern human fossil was discovered, the new species of human was named Neanderthal man.
The Neanderthal 1 fossils are known to be 40,000 years old.
Evidence of modern humans, similarly dated, has been found in caves in the Swabian Jura near Ulm.
The finds include 42,000-year-old bird bone and mammoth ivory flutes which are the oldest musical instruments ever found,[15] the 40,000-year-old Ice Age Lion Man which is the oldest uncontested figurative art ever discovered,[16] and the 35,000-year-old Venus of Hohle Fels which is the oldest uncontested human figurative art ever discovered.
[17] The Nebra sky disk is a bronze artifact created during the European Bronze Age attributed to a site near Nebra, Saxony-Anhalt.
It is part of UNESCO's Memory of the World Register.
The Germanic tribes are thought to date from the Nordic Bronze Age or the Pre-Roman Iron Age. From southern Scandinavia and north Germany, they expanded south, east and west from the 1st century BC, coming into contact with the Celtic tribes of Gaul as well as Iranian, Baltic, and Slavic tribes in Central and Eastern Europe.
[19] Under Augustus, Rome began to invade Germania (an area extending roughly from the Rhine to the Ural Mountains).
In 9 AD, three Roman legions led by Varus were defeated by the Cheruscan leader Arminius.
By 100 AD, when Tacitus wrote Germania, Germanic tribes had settled along the Rhine and the Danube (the Limes Germanicus), occupying most of the area of modern Germany; Austria, Baden Württemberg, southern Bavaria, southern Hessen and the western Rhineland, however, were Roman provinces.
In the 3rd century a number of large West Germanic tribes emerged: Alemanni, Franks, Chatti, Saxons, Frisii, Sicambri, and Thuringii.
Around 260, the Germanic peoples broke into Roman-controlled lands.
[21] After the invasion of the Huns in 375, and with the decline of Rome from 395, Germanic tribes moved further south-west.
Simultaneously several large tribes formed in what is now Germany and displaced the smaller Germanic tribes.
Large areas (known since the Merovingian period as Austrasia) were occupied by the Franks, and Northern Germany was ruled by the Saxons and Slavs.
[20]
Martin Luther (1483–1546) initiated the Protestant Reformation.
For 900 years, the history of Germany was intertwined with the history of the Holy Roman Empire.[22] In 800, the Frankish king Charlemagne was crowned emperor and founded the Carolingian Empire, which was divided in 843 among his heirs.
[23] The Holy Roman Empire included the eastern portion of Charlemagne's original kingdom and emerged as the strongest.
Its territory stretched from the Eider River in the north to the Mediterranean coast in the south.
[23]
The Ottonian emperors (919–1024) consolidated several major duchies and the German king Otto I was crowned Holy Roman Emperor of these regions in 962.
In 996 Gregory V became the first German Pope, appointed by his cousin Otto III, whom he shortly after crowned Holy Roman Emperor.
The Holy Roman Empire absorbed northern Italy and Burgundy under the reign of the Salian emperors (1024–1125), although the emperors lost power through the Investiture Controversy.
[24]
In the 12th century, under the Hohenstaufen emperors (1138–1254), German princes increased their influence further south and east into territories inhabited by Slavs; they encouraged German settlement in these areas, called the eastern settlement movement (Ostsiedlung).
Members of the Hanseatic League, which included mostly north German cities and towns, prospered in the expansion of trade.
[25] In the south, the Greater Ravensburg Trade Corporation (Große Ravensburger Handelsgesellschaft) served a similar function.
The edict of the Golden Bull issued in 1356 by Emperor Charles IV provided the basic constitutional structure of the Empire and codified the election of the emperor by seven prince-electors who ruled some of the most powerful principalities and archbishoprics.
[26]
Population declined in the first half of the 14th century, starting with the Great Famine in 1315, followed by the Black Death of 1348–50.
[27] Despite the decline, however, German artists, engineers, and scientists developed a wide array of techniques similar to those used by the Italian artists and designers of the time who flourished in such merchant city-states as Venice, Florence and Genoa.
Artistic and cultural centers throughout the German states produced such artists as the Augsburg painters Hans Holbein and his son, and Albrecht Dürer.
Johannes Gutenberg introduced moveable-type printing to Europe, a development that played a key role in the Renaissance, Reformation, the Age of Enlightenment, and the Scientific revolution, and laid the material basis for the modern knowledge-based economy and the spread of learning to the masses.
The Holy Roman Empire in 1648, after the Peace of Westphalia which ended the Thirty Years' War
In 1517, the Wittenberg monk Martin Luther publicised The Ninety-Five Theses, challenging the Roman Catholic Church and initiating the Protestant Reformation.
In 1555, the Peace of Augsburg established Lutheranism as an acceptable alternative to Catholicism, but also decreed that the faith of the prince was to be the faith of his subjects, a principle called Cuius regio, eius religio.
The agreement at Augsburg failed to address other religious creed: for example, the Reformed faith was still considered a heresy and the principle did not address the possible conversion of an ecclesiastic ruler, such as happened in Electorate of Cologne in 1583.
From the Cologne War until the end of the Thirty Years' Wars (1618–1648), religious conflict devastated German lands.
[29] The latter reduced the overall population of the German states by about 30 percent, and in some places, up to 80 percent.
[30] The Peace of Westphalia ended religious warfare among the German states.
[29] German rulers were able to choose either Roman Catholicism, Lutheranism or the Reformed faith as their official religion after 1648.
In the 18th century, the Holy Roman Empire consisted of approximately 1,800 territories.[32] The elaborate legal system initiated by a series of Imperial Reforms (approximately 1450–1555) created the Imperial Estates and provided for considerable local autonomy among ecclesiastical, secular, and hereditary states, reflected in Imperial Diet.
The House of Habsburg held the imperial crown from 1438 until the death of Charles VI in 1740.
Having no male heirs, he had convinced the Electors to retain Habsburg hegemony in the office of the emperor by agreeing to the Pragmatic Sanction.
This was finally settled through the War of Austrian Succession; in the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, Maria Theresa's husband became Holy Roman Emperor, and she ruled the Empire as Empress Consort.
From 1740, dualism between the Austrian Habsburg Monarchy and the Kingdom of Prussia dominated the German states in the 18th century.
As a consequence of the French Revolutionary Wars, and the subsequent final meeting of the Imperial Diet, most of the secular Free Imperial Cities were annexed by dynastic territories; the ecclesiastical territories were secularized and annexed.
In 1806 the Imperium was dissolved; German states, particularly the Rhineland states, fell under the influence of France.
Until 1815, France, Russia, Prussia and the Habsburgs competed for hegemony in the German states during the Napoleonic Wars.
Following the fall of Napoleon, the Congress of Vienna (convened in 1814) founded the German Confederation (Deutscher Bund), a loose league of 39 sovereign states.
The appointment of the Emperor of Austria as the permanent president of the Confederation reflected the Congress's failure to accept Prussia's influence among the German states, and acerbated the long-standing competition between the Hohenzollern and Habsburg interests.
Disagreement within restoration politics partly led to the rise of liberal movements, followed by new measures of repression by Austrian statesman Metternich.
The Zollverein, a tariff union, furthered economic unity in the German states.
[34] National and liberal ideals of the French Revolution gained increasing support among many, especially young, Germans.
The Hambach Festival in May 1832 was a main event in support of German unity, freedom and democracy.
In the light of a series of revolutionary movements in Europe, which established a republic in France, intellectuals and commoners started the Revolutions of 1848 in the German states.
King Frederick William IV of Prussia was offered the title of Emperor, but with a loss of power; he rejected the crown and the proposed constitution, leading to a temporary setback for the movement.
Foundation of the German Empire in Versailles, 1871. Bismarck is at the center in a white uniform.
King William I appointed Otto von Bismarck as the new Minister President of Prussia in 1862. Bismarck successfully concluded war on Denmark in 1864, which promoted German over Danish interests in the Jutland peninsula.
The subsequent (and decisive) Prussian victory in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 enabled him to create the North German Confederation (Norddeutscher Bund) which excluded Austria from the federation's affairs.
After the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, the German princes proclaimed the founding of the German Empire in 1871 at Versailles, uniting all scattered parts of Germany except Austria.
Prussia was the dominant constituent state of the new empire; the Hohenzollern King of Prussia ruled as its concurrent Emperor, and Berlin became its capital.
[35]
The German Empire (1871–1918), with the Kingdom of Prussia in blue
In the Gründerzeit period following the unification of Germany, Bismarck's foreign policy as Chancellor of Germany under Emperor William I secured Germany's position as a great nation by forging alliances, isolating France by diplomatic means, and avoiding war.
At the Berlin Conference in 1884, Germany claimed several colonies including German East Africa, German South-West Africa, Togo, and Cameroon.
[36] Under Wilhelm II, however, Germany, like other European powers, took an imperialistic course, leading to friction with neighbouring countries.
Most alliances in which Germany had previously been involved were not renewed.
This resulted in creation of a dual alliance with the multinational realm of Austria-Hungary, promoting at least benevolent neutrality if not outright military support.
Subsequently, the Triple Alliance of 1882 included Italy, completing a Central European geographic alliance that illustrated German, Austrian and Italian fears of incursions against them by France and/or Russia.
Similarly, Britain, France and Russia also concluded alliances that would protect them against Habsburg interference with Russian interests in the Balkans or German interference against France.
The assassination of Austria's crown prince on 28 June 1914 provided the pretext for the Austrian Empire to attack Serbia and trigger World War I.
After four years of warfare, in which approximately two million German soldiers were killed,[38] a general armistice ended the fighting on 11 November, and German troops returned home.
In the German Revolution (November 1918), Emperor Wilhelm II and all German ruling princes abdicated their positions and responsibilities.
Germany's new political leadership signed the Treaty of Versailles in 1919.
In this treaty, Germany, as part of the Central Powers, accepted defeat by the Allies in one of the bloodiest conflicts of all time.
Germans perceived the treaty as humiliating and unjust and it was later seen by historians as influential in the rise of Adolf Hitler.
Germany was declared a republic at the beginning of the German Revolution in November 1918. On 11 August 1919 President Friedrich Ebert signed the democratic Weimar Constitution.
[42] In the subsequent struggle for power, the radical-left Communists seized power in Bavaria, but conservative elements in other parts of Germany attempted to overthrow the Republic in the Kapp Putsch.
It was supported by parts of the Reichswehr (military) and other conservative, nationalistic and monarchist factions.
After a tumultuous period of bloody street fighting in the major industrial centers, the occupation of the Ruhr by Belgian and French troops and the rise of inflation culminating in the hyperinflation of 1922–23, a debt restructuring plan and the creation of a new currency in 1924 ushered in the Golden Twenties, an era of increasing artistic innovation, liberal cultural life.
Underneath it all, though, lay a current of animosity and frustration over the Treaty of Versailles, widely perceived as a stab in the back, which provided the basis of much of the anti-Semetism rife in the next two decades.
[43] The economic situation remained volatile.
Historians describe the period between 1924 and 1929 as one of "partial stabilization.
"[44] The world-wide Great Depression hit Germany in 1929.
After the federal election of 1930, Chancellor Heinrich Brüning's government was enabled by President Paul von Hindenburg to act without parliamentary approval.
Brüning's government pursued a policy of fiscal austerity and deflation which caused high unemployment of nearly 30% by 1932.
Hitler, leader of Nazi Germany (1933–1945)
The Nazi Party won the special federal election of 1932. After a series of unsuccessful cabinets, Hindenburg appointed Adolf Hitler as Chancellor of Germany in 1933.
[46] After the Reichstag fire, a decree abrogated basic civil rights and within weeks the first Nazi concentration camp at Dachau opened.
[47][48] The Enabling Act of 1933 gave Hitler unrestricted legislative power; subsequently, his government established a centralised totalitarian state, withdrew from the League of Nations following a national referendum, and began military rearmament.
[49]
Using deficit spending, a government-sponsored program for economic renewal focused on public works projects.
In public work projects of 1934, 1.
7 million Germans immediately were put to work, which gave them an income and social benefits.
[50] The most famous of the projects was the high speed roadway, the Reichsautobahn, known as the German autobahns.
[51] Other capital construction projects included such hydroelectric facilities as the Rur Dam, such water supplies as Zillierbach Dam, and such transportation hubs as Zwickau Hauptbahnhof.
[52] Over the next five years, unemployment plummeted and average wages both per hour and per week rose.
[53]
In 1935, the regime withdrew from the Treaty of Versailles and introduced the Nuremberg Laws which targeted Jews and other minorities.
Germany also reacquired control of the Saar in 1935,[54] annexed Austria in 1938, and occupied Czechoslovakia in early 1939.
Hitler's government signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop pact with Stalin and, in late 1939, Germany and the Soviets invaded Poland.
The United Kingdom and France then declared war on Germany, but not the Soviet Union,[55] marking the beginning of World War II.
[56]
In the spring of 1940, Germany conquered Denmark and Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and France forcing the French government to sign an armistice after German troops occupied most of the country.
The British repelled German air attacks in the same year.
In 1941, German troops invaded Yugoslavia, Greece and the Soviet Union.
By 1942 Germany and other Axis powers controlled most of continental Europe and North Africa but following the Soviet Union's victory at the Battle of Stalingrad, the allies' reconquest of North Africa and invasion of Italy in 1943, German forces suffered repeated military defeats.
[56] In June 1944 the Western allies invaded France and the Soviets reconquered much of Eastern Europe.
By late 1944 the Western allies had entered Germany despite one final German counter offensive in the Ardennes Forest.
Following Hitler's suicide during the Battle of Berlin, German armed forces surrendered on 8 May 1945, ending World War II in Europe.
In what later became known as The Holocaust, the German government persecuted minorities and used a network of concentration and death camps across Europe to conduct a genocide of what they considered to be inferior races.
In total, over 10 million civilians were systematically murdered, including 6 million Jews, between 220,000 and 1,500,000 Romani, 275,000 persons with disabilities, thousands of Jehovah's Witnesses, thousands of homosexuals, and hundreds of thousands of members of the political and religious opposition.
[58] Nazi policies in the occupied countries resulted in the deaths of 2.
7 million Poles,[59] 1.
3 million Ukrainians,[60] and an estimated 2.
8 million Soviet war prisoners.
[60][61] At least 40 million Europeans died in the war.
[62] German army war casualties were between 3.
3 million soldiers[63] and up to 2 million German civilians.
[64] German territorial losses resulted in the expulsion of circa 12 million of ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe.
Germany ceded roughly one-quarter of its pre-war territory.
[9] Strategic bombing and land warfare destroyed many cities and cultural heritage sites.
After World War II, former members of the regime were tried for war crimes at the Nuremberg trials.
Occupation zones in Germany, 1947. The territories east of the Oder-Neisse line, under Polish and Soviet de facto annexation (white).
After Germany surrendered, the Allies partitioned Berlin and Germany's remaining territory into four military occupation zones.
The western sectors, controlled by France, the United Kingdom, and the United States, were merged on 23 May 1949 to form the Federal Republic of Germany (Bundesrepublik Deutschland); on 7 October 1949, the Soviet Zone became the German Democratic Republic (Deutsche Demokratische Republik).
They were informally known as "West Germany" and "East Germany".
East Germany selected East Berlin as its capital, while West Germany chose Bonn as a provisional capital, to emphasise its stance that the two-state solution was an artificial and temporary status quo.
[66]
West Germany was established as a federal parliamentary republic with a "social market economy". Starting in 1948 West Germany became a major recipient of reconstruction aid under the Marshall Plan and used this to rebuild its industry.
[67] Konrad Adenauer was elected the first Federal Chancellor (Bundeskanzler) of Germany in 1949 and remained in office until 1963.
Under his and Ludwig Erhard's leadership, the country enjoyed prolonged economic growth beginning in the early 1950s, that became known as an "economic miracle" (Wirtschaftswunder).
[68] West Germany joined NATO in 1955 and was a founding member of the European Economic Community in 1957.
The Berlin Wall during its fall in 1989, with the Brandenburg Gate in the background.
East Germany was an Eastern Bloc state under political and military control by the USSR via occupation forces and the Warsaw Pact.
Although East Germany claimed to be a democracy, political power was exercised solely by leading members (Politbüro) of the communist-controlled Socialist Unity Party of Germany, supported by the Stasi, an immense secret service controlling many aspects of the society.
[69] A Soviet-style command economy was set up and the GDR later became a Comecon state.
[70] While East German propaganda was based on the benefits of the GDR's social programmes and the alleged constant threat of a West German invasion, many of its citizens looked to the West for freedom and prosperity.
[71] The Berlin Wall, built in 1961 to stop East Germans from escaping to West Germany, became a symbol of the Cold War.
Kennedy's famous Ich bin ein Berliner speech of 26 June 1963 and subsequently Ronald Reagan's, Mr.
Gorbachov, Tear down this wall! speech of 12 June 1987; hence its fall in 1989 became a symbol of the Fall of Communism, German Reunification and Die Wende.
Tensions between East and West Germany were reduced in the early 1970s by Chancellor Willy Brandt's Ostpolitik.
In summer 1989, Hungary decided to dismantle the Iron Curtain and open the borders, causing the emigration of thousands of East Germans to West Germany via Hungary.
This had devastating effects on the GDR, where regular mass demonstrations received increasing support.
The East German authorities eased the border restrictions, allowing East German citizens to travel to the West; originally intended to help retain East Germany as a state, the opening of the border actually led to an acceleration of the Wende reform process.
This culminated in the Two Plus Four Treaty a year later on 12 September 1990, under which the four occupying powers renounced their rights under the Instrument of Surrender, and Germany regained full sovereignty.
This permitted German reunification on 3 October 1990, with the accession of the five re-established states of the former GDR.
German unity was established on 3 October 1990.[73] Since 1999, the Reichstag building in Berlin has been the meeting place of the Bundestag, the German parliament.
The united Germany is considered to be the enlarged continuation of the Federal Republic of Germany and not a successor state.
As such, it retained all of West Germany's memberships in international organizations.
[74]
The modernisation and integration of the eastern German economy is a long-term process scheduled to last until the year 2019, with annual transfers from west to east amounting to roughly $80 billion.
[75]
Based on the Berlin/Bonn Act, adopted in 1994, Berlin once again became the capital of the reunified Germany, while Bonn obtained the unique status of a Bundesstadt (federal city) retaining some federal ministries.
[76] The relocation of the government was completed in 1999.
[77] Following the 1998 elections, SPD politician Gerhard Schröder became the first Chancellor of a red–green coalition with the Alliance '90/The Greens party.
Since reunification, Germany has taken a more active role in the European Union. Together with its European partners Germany signed the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, established the Eurozone in 1999, and signed the Lisbon Treaty in 2007.
[78]
Germany became a co-founder of the European Union (1993), introduced the Euro currency (2002), and signed the Lisbon Treaty in 2007 (pictured).
Germany sent a peacekeeping force to secure stability in the Balkans and sent a force of German troops to Afghanistan as part of a NATO effort to provide security in that country after the ousting of the Taliban.
[79] These deployments were controversial since Germany was bound by domestic law only to deploy troops for defence roles.
[80]
In the 2005 elections, Angela Merkel became the first female Chancellor of Germany as the leader of a grand coalition.
[35] In 2009 the German government approved a €50 billion economic stimulus plan to protect several sectors from a downturn.
[81]
In 2009, a liberal-conservative coalition under Merkel assumed leadership of the country. In 2013, a grand coalition was established in a Third Merkel cabinet.
Among the major German political projects of the early 21st century are the advancement of European integration, the energy transition (Energiewende) for a sustainable energy supply, the "Debt Brake" for balanced budgets, measures to increase the fertility rate significantly (pronatalism), and high-tech strategies for the future transition of the German economy, summarized as Industry 4.
0.
[82]
Germany was affected by the European migrant crisis in 2015 as it became the final destination of choice for most migrants entering the EU.
The country took in over a million refugees and developed a quota system which redistributed migrants around its federal states based on their tax income and existing population density.
[83]
Germany is in Western and Central Europe, with Denmark bordering to the north, Poland and the Czech Republic to the east, Austria to the southeast, Switzerland to the south-southwest, France, Luxembourg and Belgium lie to the west, and the Netherlands to the northwest.
It lies mostly between latitudes 47° and 55° N and longitudes 5° and 16° E.
Germany is also bordered by the North Sea and, at the north-northeast, by the Baltic Sea.
With Switzerland and Austria, Germany also shares a border on the fresh-water Lake Constance, the third largest lake in Central Europe.
[84] German territory covers 357,021 km2 (137,847 sq mi), consisting of 349,223 km2 (134,836 sq mi) of land and 7,798 km2 (3,011 sq mi) of water.
It is the seventh largest country by area in Europe and the 62nd largest in the world.
Elevation ranges from the mountains of the Alps (highest point: the Zugspitze at 2,962 metres or 9,718 feet) in the south to the shores of the North Sea (Nordsee) in the northwest and the Baltic Sea (Ostsee) in the northeast.
The forested uplands of central Germany and the lowlands of northern Germany (lowest point: Wilstermarsch at 3.
54 metres or 11.
6 feet below sea level) are traversed by such major rivers as the Rhine, Danube and Elbe.
Germany's alpine glaciers are experiencing deglaciation.
Significant natural resources include iron ore, coal, potash, timber, lignite, uranium, copper, natural gas, salt, nickel, arable land and water.
[85]
Most of Germany has a temperate seasonal climate dominated by humid westerly winds. The country is situated in between the oceanic Western European and the continental Eastern European climate.
The climate is moderated by the North Atlantic Drift, the northern extension of the Gulf Stream.
This warmer water affects the areas bordering the North Sea; consequently in the northwest and the north the climate is oceanic.
Germany gets an average of 789 mm (31 in) precipitation per year.
Rainfall occurs year-round, with no consistent dry season.
Winters are mild and summers tend to be warm: temperatures can exceed 30 °C (86 °F).
[86]
The east has a more continental climate: winters can be very cold and summers very warm, and longer dry periods can occur.
Central and southern Germany are transition regions which vary from moderately oceanic to continental.
In addition to the maritime and continental climates that predominate over most of the country, the Alpine regions in the extreme south and, to a lesser degree, some areas of the Central German Uplands have a mountain climate, with lower temperatures and greater precipitation.
[86]
Summer in the Rhine valley at Lorelei, Sylt coastal area in autumn, Lüneburg Heath landscape in spring, Zugspitze summit in winter
The territory of Germany can be subdivided into two ecoregions: European-Mediterranean montane mixed forests and Northeast-Atlantic shelf marine.
[87] As of 2008 the majority of Germany is covered by either arable land (34%) or forest and woodland (30.
1%); only 13.
4% of the area consists of permanent pastures, 11.
8% is covered by settlements and streets.
[88]
Plants and animals include those generally common to Central Europe. Beeches, oaks, and other deciduous trees constitute one-third of the forests; conifers are increasing as a result of reforestation.
Spruce and fir trees predominate in the upper mountains, while pine and larch are found in sandy soil.
There are many species of ferns, flowers, fungi, and mosses.
Wild animals include roe deer, wild boar, mouflon (a subspecies of wild sheep), fox, badger, hare, and small numbers of the Eurasian beaver.
[89] The blue cornflower was once a German national symbol.
[90]
The 14 national parks in Germany include the Jasmund National Park, the Vorpommern Lagoon Area National Park, the Müritz National Park, the Wadden Sea National Parks, the Harz National Park, the Hainich National Park, the Black Forest National Park, the Saxon Switzerland National Park, the Bavarian Forest National Park and the Berchtesgaden National Park.
In addition, there are 14 Biosphere Reserves, as well as 98 nature parks.
More than 400 registered zoos and animal parks operate in Germany, which is believed to be the largest number in any country.
[91] The Berlin Zoo, opened in 1844, is the oldest zoo in Germany, and presents the most comprehensive collection of species in the world.
[92]
Germany has a number of large cities. There are 11 officially recognised metropolitan regions in Germany.
34 cities have been identified as regiopolis.
The largest conurbation is the Rhine-Ruhr region (11.
7 million in 2008), including Düsseldorf (the capital of North Rhine-Westphalia), Cologne, Bonn, Dortmund, Essen, Duisburg, and Bochum.
[93]
Woche der Umwelt 2012 (7344500700).jpg 	Angela Merkel (August 2012) cropped.jpg
Germany is a federal, parliamentary, representative democratic republic. The German political system operates under a framework laid out in the 1949 constitutional document known as the Grundgesetz (Basic Law).
Amendments generally require a two-thirds majority of both chambers of parliament; the fundamental principles of the constitution, as expressed in the articles guaranteeing human dignity, the separation of powers, the federal structure, and the rule of law are valid in perpetuity.
[94]
The president, Joachim Gauck (18 March 2012–present), is the head of state and invested primarily with representative responsibilities and powers.
He is elected by the Bundesversammlung (federal convention), an institution consisting of the members of the Bundestag and an equal number of state delegates.
The second-highest official in the German order of precedence is the Bundestagspräsident (President of the Bundestag), who is elected by the Bundestag and responsible for overseeing the daily sessions of the body.
The third-highest official and the head of government is the Chancellor, who is appointed by the Bundespräsident after being elected by the Bundestag.
[35]
The chancellor, Angela Merkel (22 November 2005–present), is the head of government and exercises executive power, similar to the role of a Prime Minister in other parliamentary democracies.
Federal legislative power is vested in the parliament consisting of the Bundestag (Federal Diet) and Bundesrat (Federal Council), which together form the legislative body.
The Bundestag is elected through direct elections, by proportional representation (mixed-member).
[85] The members of the Bundesrat represent the governments of the sixteen federated states and are members of the state cabinets.
[35]
Since 1949, the party system has been dominated by the Christian Democratic Union and the Social Democratic Party of Germany.
So far every chancellor has been a member of one of these parties.
However, the smaller liberal Free Democratic Party (in parliament from 1949 to 2013) and the Alliance '90/The Greens (in parliament since 1983) have also played important roles.
[95]
The debt-to-GDP ratio of Germany had its peak in 2010 when it stood at 80.3% and decreased since then.
[96] According to Eurostat, the government gross debt of Germany amounts to €2,152.
0 billion or 71.
9% of its GDP in 2015.
[97] The federal government achieved a budget surplus of €12.
1 billion ($13.
1 billion) in 2015.
[98] Germany's credit rating by credit rating agencies Standard & Poor's, Moody's and Fitch Ratings stands at the highest possible rating AAA with a stable outlook in 2016.
[99]
Judges of the Bundesverfassungsgericht (Federal Constitutional Court) in Karlsruhe in 1989
Germany has a civil law system based on Roman law with some references to Germanic law. The Bundesverfassungsgericht (Federal Constitutional Court) is the German Supreme Court responsible for constitutional matters, with power of judicial review.
[35][100] Germany's supreme court system, called Oberste Gerichtshöfe des Bundes, is specialised: for civil and criminal cases, the highest court of appeal is the inquisitorial Federal Court of Justice, and for other affairs the courts are the Federal Labour Court, the Federal Social Court, the Federal Finance Court and the Federal Administrative Court.
Criminal and private laws are codified on the national level in the Strafgesetzbuch and the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch respectively.
The German penal system seeks the rehabilitation of the criminal and the protection of the public.
[101] Except for petty crimes, which are tried before a single professional judge, and serious political crimes, all charges are tried before mixed tribunals on which lay judges (Schöffen) sit side by side with professional judges.
[102][103] Many of the fundamental matters of administrative law remain in the jurisdiction of the states.
Germany comprises sixteen federal states which are collectively referred to as Bundesländer.[104] Each state has its own state constitution[105] and is largely autonomous in regard to its internal organisation.
Because of differences in size and population the subdivisions of these states vary, especially as between city states (Stadtstaaten) and states with larger territories (Flächenländer).
For regional administrative purposes five states, namely Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Hesse, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony, consist of a total of 22 Government Districts (Regierungsbezirke).
As of 2013 Germany is divided into 402 districts (Kreise) at a municipal level; these consist of 295 rural districts and 107 urban districts.
[106]
Coat of arms of Lower Saxony.svg Lower Saxony
Coat of arms of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania (great).svg Mecklenburg-
Coat of arms of North Rhine-Westfalia.svg North Rhine-
Coat of arms of Rhineland-Palatinate.svg Rhineland-Palatinate
Arms of the Free State of Bavaria.svg Bavaria
Coat of arms of Baden-Württemberg (lesser).svg Baden-
DEU Schleswig-Holstein COA.svg Schleswig-Holstein
State 	Capital 	Area (km2) 	Population[107]
Baden-Württemberg 	Stuttgart 	35,752 	10,569,100
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern 	Schwerin 	23,174 	1,600,300
North Rhine-Westphalia 	Düsseldorf 	34,043 	17,554,300
Rhineland-Palatinate 	Mainz 	19,847 	3,990,300
Saxony-Anhalt 	Magdeburg 	20,445 	2,259,400
Schleswig-Holstein 	Kiel 	15,763 	2,806,500
Germany hosted the G8 summit in Heiligendamm, 6–8 June 2007
Germany has a network of 227 diplomatic missions abroad[108] and maintains relations with more than 190 countries.
[109] As of 2011 it is the largest contributor to the budget of the European Union (providing 20%)[110] and the third largest contributor to the UN (providing 8%).
[111] Germany is a member of NATO, the OECD, the G8, the G20, the World Bank and the IMF.
It has played an influential role in the European Union since its inception and has maintained a strong alliance with France and all neighboring countries since 1990.
Germany promotes the creation of a more unified European political, economic and security apparatus.
[112][113]
The development policy of Germany is an independent area of foreign policy. It is formulated by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and carried out by the implementing organisations.
The German government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community.
[114] It is the world's third biggest aid donor in 2009 after the United States and France.
[115][116]
In 1999, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder's government defined a new basis for German foreign policy by taking part in the NATO decisions surrounding the Kosovo War and by sending German troops into combat for the first time since 1945.
[117] The governments of Germany and the United States are close political allies.
[35] Cultural ties and economic interests have crafted a bond between the two countries resulting in Atlanticism.
[118]
The Eurofighter Typhoon is part of the Luftwaffe fleet
Germany's military, the Bundeswehr, is organised into Heer (Army and special forces KSK), Marine (Navy), Luftwaffe (Air Force), Bundeswehr Joint Medical Service and Streitkräftebasis (Joint Support Service) branches.
In absolute terms, German military expenditure is the 9th highest in the world.
[119] In 2015, military spending was at €32.
9 billion, about 1.
2% of the country's GDP, well below the NATO target of 2%.
[120]
As of December 2015 the Bundeswehr employed roughly 178,000 soldiers, including 9,500 volunteers.[121] Reservists are available to the Armed Forces and participate in defence exercises and deployments abroad.
[122] Since 2001 women may serve in all functions of service without restriction.
[123] About 19,000 female soldiers are on active duty.
According to SIPRI, Germany was the fourth largest exporter of major arms in the world in 2014.
[124]
In peacetime, the Bundeswehr is commanded by the Minister of Defence. In state of defence, the Chancellor would become commander-in-chief of the Bundeswehr.
[125]
The role of the Bundeswehr is described in the Constitution of Germany as defensive only. But after a ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court in 1994 the term "defense" has been defined to not only include protection of the borders of Germany, but also crisis reaction and conflict prevention, or more broadly as guarding the security of Germany anywhere in the world.
As of January 2015, the German military has about 2,370 troops stationed in foreign countries as part of international peacekeeping forces, including about 850 Bundeswehr troops in the NATO-led ISAF force in Afghanistan and Uzbekistan, 670 German soldiers in Kosovo, and 120 troops with UNIFIL in Lebanon.
[126]
Until 2011, military service was compulsory for men at age 18, and conscripts served six-month tours of duty; conscientious objectors could instead opt for an equal length of Zivildienst (civilian service), or a six-year commitment to (voluntary) emergency services like a fire department or the Red Cross.
In 2011 conscription was officially suspended and replaced with a voluntary service.
[127][128]
Germany maintains a large automotive industry, and is the world's third largest exporter of goods.[129]
Germany has a social market economy with a highly skilled labour force, a large capital stock, a low level of corruption,[130] and a high level of innovation.
[131] It is the world's third largest exporter of goods,[129] and has the largest national economy in Europe which is also the world's fourth largest by nominal GDP[132] and the fifth one by PPP.
[133]
The service sector contributes approximately 71% of the total GDP (including information technology), industry 28%, and agriculture 1%.
[85] The unemployment rate published by Eurostat amounts to 4.
7% in January 2015, which is the lowest rate of all 28 EU member states.
[134] With 7.
1% Germany also has the lowest youth unemployment rate of all EU member states.
[134] According to the OECD Germany has one of the highest labour productivity levels in the world.
[135]
Frankfurt is a leading financial center in Europe and seat of the ECB.
Germany is part of the European single market which represents more than 508 million consumers. Several domestic commercial policies are determined by agreements among European Union (EU) members and by EU legislation.
Germany introduced the common European currency, the Euro in 2002.
[136][137] It is a member of the Eurozone which represents around 338 million citizens.
Its monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank, which is headquartered in Frankfurt, the financial centre of continental Europe.
Being home to the modern car, the automotive industry in Germany is regarded as one of the most competitive and innovative in the world,[138] and is the fourth largest by production.
[139] The top 10 exports of Germany are vehicles, machineries, chemical goods, electronic products, electrical equipments, pharmaceuticals, transport equipments, basic metals, food products, and rubber and plastics.
[140]
Of the world's 500 largest stock-market-listed companies measured by revenue in 2014, the Fortune Global 500, 28 are headquartered in Germany.
30 Germany-based companies are included in the DAX, the German stock market index.
Well-known international brands include Mercedes-Benz, BMW, SAP, Volkswagen, Audi, Siemens, Allianz, Adidas, Porsche, and DHL.
[141]
Germany is recognised for its large portion of specialised small and medium enterprises, known as the Mittelstand model.
Around 1,000 of these companies are global market leaders in their segment and are labelled hidden champions.
[142] Berlin developed a thriving, cosmopolitan hub for startup companies and became a leading location for venture capital funded firms in the European Union.
[143]
The list includes the largest German companies by revenue in 2011:[144]
Germany is part of a monetary union, the eurozone (dark blue), and of the EU single market.
1. 	Volkswagen 	Wolfsburg 	159,000 	15,800 	502,000
2. 	E.ON 	Düsseldorf 	113,000 	−1,900 	79,000
3. 	Daimler 	Stuttgart 	107,000 	6,000 	271,000
4. 	Siemens 	Berlin, München 	74,000 	6,300 	360,000
5. 	BASF 	Ludwigshafen 	73,000 	6,600 	111,000
7. 	Metro 	Düsseldorf 	67,000 	740 	288,000
8. 	Schwarz Gruppe 	Neckarsulm 	63,000 	N/A 	315,000
9. 	Deutsche Telekom 	Bonn 	59,000 	670 	235,000
10. 	Deutsche Post 	Bonn 	53,000 	1,300 	471,000
— 	Allianz 	München 	104,000 	2,800 	141,000
— 	Deutsche Bank 	Frankfurt 	21,600 	4,300 	101,000
With its central position in Europe, Germany is a transport hub for the continent.[145] Like its neighbours in Western Europe, Germany's road network is amongst the densest in the world.
[146] The motorway (Autobahn) network ranks as the third-largest worldwide in length and is known for its lack of a general speed limit.
[147]
Germany has established a polycentric network of high-speed trains. The InterCityExpress or ICE network of the Deutsche Bahn serves major German cities as well as destinations in neighbouring countries with speeds up to 300 km/h (186 mph).
[148] The German railways are subsidised by the government, receiving €17.
0 billion in 2014.
[149]
The largest German airports are Frankfurt Airport and Munich Airport, both hubs of Lufthansa, while Air Berlin has hubs at Berlin Tegel and Düsseldorf.
Other major airports include Berlin Schönefeld, Hamburg, Cologne/Bonn and Leipzig/Halle.
[150] The Port of Hamburg is one of the top twenty largest container ports in the world.
[151]
In 2008, Germany was the world's sixth-largest consumer of energy,[152] and 60% of its primary energy was imported.
[153] In 2014, energy sources were: oil (35.
0%); coal, including lignite (24.
6%); natural gas (20.
5%); nuclear (8.
1%); hydro-electric and renewable sources (11.
1%).
[154] The government and the nuclear power industry agreed to phase out all nuclear power plants by 2021.
[155] It also enforces energy conservation, green technologies, emission reduction activities,[156] and aims to meet the country's electricity demands using 40% renewable sources by 2020.
Germany is committed to the Kyoto protocol and several other treaties promoting biodiversity, low emission standards, water management, and the renewable energy commercialisation.
[157] The country's household recycling rate is among the highest in the world - at around 65%.
[158][158] Nevertheless, the country's greenhouse gas emissions were the highest in the EU in 2010.
[159] The German energy transition (Energiewende) is the recognised move to a sustainable economy by means of energy efficiency.
Albert Einstein, physicist. The Nobel Prize has been awarded to 104 German laureates.
Germany's achievements in the sciences have been significant, and research and development efforts form an integral part of the economy.
[161] The Nobel Prize has been awarded to 104 German laureates.
[162] In the beginning of the 20th century, German laureates had more awards than those of any other nation, especially in the sciences (physics, chemistry, and physiology or medicine).
[163][164]
Notable German physicists before the 20th century include Hermann von Helmholtz, Joseph von Fraunhofer and Gabriel Daniel Fahrenheit, among others.
Albert Einstein introduced the relativity theories for light and gravity in 1905 and 1915 respectively.
Along with Max Planck, he was instrumental in the introduction of quantum mechanics, in which Werner Heisenberg and Max Born later made major contributions.
[165] Wilhelm Röntgen discovered X-rays.
[166] Otto Hahn was a pioneer in the fields of radiochemistry and discovered nuclear fission, while Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch were founders of microbiology.
Numerous mathematicians were born in Germany, including Carl Friedrich Gauss, David Hilbert, Bernhard Riemann, Gottfried Leibniz, Karl Weierstrass, Hermann Weyl and Felix Klein.
European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) in Darmstadt
Germany has been the home of many famous inventors and engineers, including Hans Geiger, the creator of the Geiger counter; and Konrad Zuse, who built the first fully automatic digital computer.
[167] Such German inventors, engineers and industrialists as Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin,[168] Otto Lilienthal, Gottlieb Daimler, Rudolf Diesel, Hugo Junkers and Karl Benz helped shape modern automotive and air transportation technology.
German institutions like the German Aerospace Center (DLR) are the largest contributor to ESA.
Aerospace engineer Wernher von Braun developed the first space rocket at Peenemünde and later on was a prominent member of NASA and developed the Saturn V Moon rocket.
Heinrich Rudolf Hertz's work in the domain of electromagnetic radiation was pivotal to the development of modern telecommunication.
Research institutions in Germany include the Max Planck Society, the Helmholtz Association and the Fraunhofer Society.
The Wendelstein 7-X in Greifswald hosts a facility in the research of fusion power for instance.
[170] The Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize is granted to ten scientists and academics every year.
With a maximum of €2.
5 million per award it is one of highest endowed research prizes in the world.
[171]
The Berchtesgaden alpine region. Bavaria is the overall most visited German state, and Mecklenburg-Vorpommern by domestic tourists.
Germany is the seventh most visited country in the world,[172][173] with a total of 407 million overnights during 2012.
[174] This number includes 68.
83 million nights by foreign visitors.
In 2012, over 30.
4 million international tourists arrived in Germany.
Berlin has become the third most visited city destination in Europe.
[175] Additionally, more than 30% of Germans spend their holiday in their own country, with the biggest share going to Mecklenburg-Vorpommern.
Domestic and international travel and tourism combined directly contribute over EUR43.
2 billion to German GDP.
Including indirect and induced impacts, the industry contributes 4.
5% of German GDP and supports 2 million jobs (4.
8% of total employment).
[176]
Germany is well known for its diverse tourist routes, such as the Romantic Road, the Wine Route, the Castle Road, and the Avenue Road.
The German Timber-Frame Road (Deutsche Fachwerkstraße) connects towns with examples of these structures.
[177][178] There are 40 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Germany, including the old town cores of Regensburg, Bamberg, Lübeck, Quedlinburg, Weimar, Stralsund and Wismar.
Germany's most-visited landmarks include i.
e.
Neuschwanstein Castle, Cologne Cathedral, Berlin Bundestag, Hofbräuhaus Munich, Heidelberg Castle, Dresden Zwinger, Fernsehturm Berlin and Aachen Cathedral.
The Europa-Park near Freiburg is Europe's second most popular theme park resort.
[179]
German population development from 1800 to 2010[180]
With a population of 80.2 million according to the 2011 census,[181] rising to 81.5 million as at 30 June 2015[182] and to at least 81.
9 million as at 31 December 2015,[183] Germany is the most populous country in the European Union, the second most populous country in Europe after Russia, and ranks as the 16th most populous country in the world.
[184] Its population density stands at 227 inhabitants per square kilometre (588 per square mile).
The overall life expectancy in Germany at birth is 80.
19 years (77.
93 years for males and 82.
58 years for females).
[85] The fertility rate of 1.
41 children born per woman (2011 estimates), or 8.
33 births per 1000 inhabitants, is one of the lowest in the world.
[85] Since the 1970s, Germany's death rate has exceeded its birth rate.
[185] However, Germany is witnessing increased birth rates and migration rates since the beginning of the 2010s,[186] particularly a rise in the number of well-educated migrants.
Four sizable groups of people are referred to as "national minorities" because their ancestors have lived in their respective regions for centuries.
[189] There is a Danish minority (about 50,000) in the northernmost state of Schleswig-Holstein.
[189] The Sorbs, a Slavic population of about 60,000, are in the Lusatia region of Saxony and Brandenburg.
The Roma and Sinti live throughout the whole federal territory and the Frisians live on Schleswig-Holstein's western coast, and in the north-western part of Lower Saxony.
[189]
Approximately 5 million Germans live abroad.[190]
Germany is home to the third-highest number of international migrants.[191]
In 2014, about seven million of Germany's 81 million residents did not have German citizenship. Ninety-six percent of these people lived in western Germany and mostly in urban areas.
[192] [193]
In the 1960s and 1970s, the German governments invited "guest workers" (Gastarbeiter) to migrate to Germany for work in the German industries.
Many companies preferred to keep these workers employed in Germany after they had trained them and Germany's immigrant population has steadily increased.
As of 2011, about six million foreign citizens (7.
7% of the population) were registered in Germany.
[181]
The Federal Statistical Office classifies the citizens by immigrant background. Regarding immigrant background, 20% of the country's residents, or more than 16 million people, were of immigrant or partially immigrant descent in 2009 (including persons descending or partially descending from ethnic German repatriates).
[194] In 2010, 29% of families with children under 18 had at least one parent with immigrant roots.
[195]
In 2006, the United Nations Population Fund listed Germany as host to the third-highest number of international migrants worldwide, about 5% or 10 million of all 191 million migrants.
[191] In 2013, Germany ranked 11th amongst EU countries and 72nd globally in terms of the percentage of migrants who made up part of the country's population.
As of 2008, the largest national group was from Turkey (2.
5 million), followed by Italy (776,000) and Poland (687,000).
[196] Since 1987, around 3 million ethnic Germans, mostly from the former Eastern Bloc countries, have exercised their right of return and emigrated to Germany.
[197]
According to the 2011 German Census, Christianity is the largest religion in Germany, claiming 66.8% of the total population.
[198] Relative to the whole population, 31.
7% declared themselves as Protestants, including members of the Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD) (30.
8%) and the free churches (German: Evangelische Freikirchen) (0.
9%), and 31.
2% declared themselves as Roman Catholics.
[199] Orthodox believers constituted 1.
3%, while Jews–0.
1%.
Other religions accounted for 2.
7%.
Geographically, Protestantism is concentrated in the northern, central and eastern parts of the country.
These are mostly members of the EKD, which encompasses Lutheran, Reformed and unions of both traditions dating back to the Prussian Union of 1817.
Roman Catholicism is concentrated in the south and west.
In 2011, 33% of Germans declared themselves to be agnostic, atheist or other kind of irreligious. Irreligion in Germany is strongest in the states of former East Germany and major metropolitan areas, where a majority of the population identifies as atheist.
[200][201]
Islam is the second largest religion in the country. In the 2011 census, 1.9% of Germans declared themselves to be Muslims.
[199] Most of the Muslims are Sunnis and Alevites from Turkey, but there are a small number of Shi'ites, Ahmadiyyas and other denominations.
[202] German Muslims, a large portion of whom are of Turkish origin, lack full official state recognition of their religious community.
[201]
Other religions comprising less than one percent of Germany's population[199] are Buddhism with 250,000 adherents (roughly 0.
3%) and Hinduism with some 100,000 adherents (0.
1%).
All other religious communities in Germany have fewer than 50,000 adherents each.
[203]
Knowledge of the German language in EU member states (2010)[f]
German is the official and predominant spoken language in Germany.[204] It is one of 24 official and working languages of the European Union,[205] and one of the three working languages of the European Commission.
German is the most widely spoken first language in the European Union, with around 100 million native speakers.
[206]
Recognized native minority languages in Germany are Danish, Low German, Sorbian, Romany, and Frisian; they are officially protected by the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
The most used immigrant languages are Turkish, Kurdish, Polish, the Balkan languages, and Russian.
Germans are typically multilingual: 67% of German citizens claim to be able to communicate in at least one foreign language and 27% in at least two.
[204]
Standard German, called Hochdeutsch, is a West Germanic language and is closely related to and classified alongside English, Low German, Dutch, and the Frisian languages.
To a lesser extent, it is also related to the East (extinct) and North Germanic languages.
Most German vocabulary is derived from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family.
[207] Significant minorities of words are derived from Latin and Greek, with a smaller amount from French and most recently English (known as Denglisch).
German is written using the Latin alphabet.
German dialects, traditional local varieties traced back to the Germanic tribes, are distinguished from varieties of standard German by their lexicon, phonology, and syntax.
[208]
The Heidelberg University, established in 1386, is the oldest of Germany's universities and among its best ranked.
[209]
Responsibility for educational supervision in Germany is primarily organised within the individual federal states.
Optional kindergarten education is provided for all children between three and six years old, after which school attendance is compulsory for at least nine years.
Primary education usually lasts for four to six years and public schools are not stratified by academic ability at this stage.
[210] Secondary education includes three traditional types of schools focused on different academic levels: the Gymnasium enrols the most gifted children and prepares students for university studies; the Realschule for intermediate students lasts six years and the Hauptschule prepares pupils for vocational education.
[211] The Gesamtschule (comprehensive school) unifies all secondary education.
A system of apprenticeship called Duale Ausbildung (dual education) does not lead to an academic degree.
Instead, it allows students in vocational training to learn in a company as well as in a state-run vocational school.
[210] This model is highly regarded and reproduced all around the world.
Most of the German universities are public institutions, and students have traditionally studied without fee payment.
[213] The general requirement for university is the Abitur, a qualification normally based on continuous assessment during the last few years at school and final examinations.
However, there are a number of exceptions, depending on the state, the university and the subject.
Academic education is open to international students and is increasingly common.
[214]
In the Academic Ranking of World Universities 2008, six of the top 100 universities in the world, and 18 of the top 200, are in Germany.
The established universities in Germany include some of the oldest in the world, with Heidelberg University (established in 1386) being the oldest in Germany.
Heidelberg is followed by Leipzig University (1409), Rostock University (1419), Greifswald University (1456), Freiburg University (1457) and the University of Munich (1472).
[215]
The Hospice of the Holy Spirit in Lübeck, established in 1286, is a precursor to modern hospitals.[216]
Germany's system of hospices, called spitals, dates from medieval times, and today, Germany has the world's oldest universal health care system, dating from Bismarck's social legislation of the 1880s,[217] Since the 1880s, reforms and provisions have ensured a balanced health care system.
Currently the population is covered by a health insurance plan provided by statute, with criteria allowing some groups to opt for a private health insurance contract.
According to the World Health Organization, Germany's health care system was 77% government-funded and 23% privately funded as of 2005.
[218] In 2005, Germany spent 11% of its GDP on health care.
Germany ranked 20th in the world in life expectancy with 77 years for men and 82 years for women, and it had a very low infant mortality rate (4 per 1,000 live births).
In 2010, the principal cause of death was cardiovascular disease, at 41%, followed by malignant tumours, at 26%.
[219] In 2008, about 82,000 Germans had been infected with HIV/AIDS and 26,000 had died from the disease (cumulatively, since 1982).
[220] According to a 2005 survey, 27% of German adults are smokers.
[220] Obesity in Germany has been increasingly cited as a major health issue.
A 2007 study shows Germany has the highest number of overweight people in Europe.
[221][222]
A Weihnachtsmarkt (Christmas market) in Germany
From its roots, culture in German states has been shaped by major intellectual and popular currents in Europe, both religious and secular.
Historically Germany has been called Das Land der Dichter und Denker ("the land of poets and thinkers"),[223] because of the major role its writers and philosophers have played in the development of Western thought and culture.
People with German ancestry make up a significant portion of population in the United States, Brazil, Canada, and Argentina.
A German cultural influence can be observed in these countries.
[224]
Germany is well known for such folk festival traditions as Oktoberfest and Christmas customs, which include Advent wreaths, Christmas pageants, Christmas trees, Stollen cakes, and other practices.
[225][226] As of 2015 the UNESCO inscribed 40 properties in Germany on the World Heritage List.
[227] There are a number of public holidays in Germany determined by each state.
Only 3 October has been a national day of Germany since 1990, celebrated as the Tag der Deutschen Einheit (German Unity Day).
[228]
In the 21st century Berlin has emerged as a major international creative center.[229] According to the Anholt–GfK Nation Brands Index, in 2014 Germany was the world's most respected nation among 50 countries (ahead of USA, UK, and France).
[230][231][232] A global opinion poll for the BBC revealed that Germany is recognised for having the most positive influence in the world in 2013 and 2014.
[233][234]
Ludwig van Beethoven (1770–1827), composer
German classical music includes works by some of the world's most well-known composers. Dieterich Buxtehude composed oratorios for organ, which influenced the later work of Johann Sebastian Bach and Georg Friedrich Händel; these men were influential composers of the Baroque period.
During his tenure as violinist and teacher at the Salzburg cathedral, Augsburg-born composer Leopold Mozart mentored one of the greatest musicians of all time: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
Ludwig van Beethoven was a crucial figure in the transition between the Classical and Romantic eras.
Carl Maria von Weber and Felix Mendelssohn were important in the early Romantic period.
Robert Schumann and Johannes Brahms composed in the Romantic idiom.
Richard Wagner was known for his operas.
Richard Strauss was a leading composer of the late Romantic and early modern eras.
Karlheinz Stockhausen and Hans Zimmer are important composers of the 20th and early 21st centuries.
Germany is the second largest music market in Europe, and fourth largest in the world.[236] German popular music of the 20th and 21st century includes the movements of Neue Deutsche Welle (Nena, Trio), pop (Boney M.
, Alphaville, Modern Talking), Ostrock (City, Keimzeit), heavy metal/rock (Rammstein, Scorpions), punk (Nina Hagen, Die Ärzte, Die Toten Hosen), pop rock (Beatsteaks, Tokio Hotel), indie (Tocotronic) and schlager pop (Ute Lemper, Katja Ebstein, Hildegard Knef, Helene Fischer).
German electronic music gained global influence, with Kraftwerk and Tangerine Dream pioneering in this genre.
[237] DJs and artists of the techno and house music scenes of Germany have become well known (e.
g.
Paul van Dyk, Paul Kalkbrenner, and Scooter).
[238]
C.D. Friedrich, Chalk Cliffs on Rügen (1818)
Franz Marc, Roe Deer in the Forest (1914)
German painters have influenced western art. Albrecht Dürer, Hans Holbein the Younger, Matthias Grünewald and Lucas Cranach the Elder were important German artists of the Renaissance, Peter Paul Rubens and Johann Baptist Zimmermann of the Baroque, Caspar David Friedrich and Carl Spitzweg of Romanticism, Max Liebermann of Impressionism and Max Ernst of Surrealism.
[239] Such German sculptors as Otto Schmidt-Hofer, Franz Iffland, and Julius Schmidt-Felling made important contributions to German art history in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
[240][241]
Several German artist groups formed in the 20th century, such as the November Group or Die Brücke (The Bridge) and Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider), by the Russian-born Wassily Kandinsky, influenced the development of Expressionism in Munich and Berlin.
The New Objectivity arose as a counter-style to it during the Weimar Republic.
Post-World War II art trends in Germany can broadly be divided into Neo-expressionism, performance art and Conceptualism.
Especially notable neo-expressionists include or included Georg Baselitz, Anselm Kiefer, Jörg Immendorff, A.
R.
Penck, Markus Lüpertz, Peter Robert Keil and Rainer Fetting.
Other notable artists who work with traditional media or figurative imagery include Martin Kippenberger, Gerhard Richter, Sigmar Polke, and Neo Rauch.
Leading German conceptual artists include or included Bernd and Hilla Becher, Hanne Darboven, Hans-Peter Feldmann, Hans Haacke, Joseph Beuys, HA Schult, Aris Kalaizis, Neo Rauch (New Leipzig School) and Andreas Gursky (photography).
Major art exhibitions and festivals in Germany are the documenta, the Berlin Biennale, transmediale and Art Cologne.
Architectural contributions from Germany include the Carolingian and Ottonian styles, which were precursors of Romanesque.
Brick Gothic is a distinctive medieval style that evolved in Germany.
Also in Renaissance and Baroque art, regional and typically German elements evolved (e.
g.
Weser Renaissance and Dresden Baroque).
Among many renowned Baroque masters were Pöppelmann, Balthasar Neumann, Knobelsdorff and the Asam brothers.
The Wessobrunner School exerted a decisive influence on, and at times even dominated, the art of stucco in southern Germany in the 18th century.
The Upper Swabian Baroque Route offers a baroque-themed tourist route that highlights the contributions of such artists and craftsmen as the sculptor and plasterer Johann Michael Feuchtmayer, one of the foremost members of the Feuchtmayer family and the brothers Johann Baptist Zimmermann and Dominikus Zimmermann.
Vernacular architecture in Germany is often identified by its timber framing (Fachwerk) traditions. German Fachwerk building styles vary across regions, and among carpentry styles.
Planning laws dictate that a half-timbered house must be authentic to regional or even city-specific designs before being accepted.
[243][244]
When industrialisation spread across Europe, Classicism and a distinctive style of historism developed in Germany, sometimes referred to as Gründerzeit style, due to the economical boom years at the end of the 19th century.
Regional historicist styles include the Hanover School, Nuremberg Style and Dresden's Semper-Nicolai School.
Among the most famous of German buildings, the Schloss Neuschwanstein represents Romanesque Revival.
Notable sub-styles that evolved since the 18th century are the German spa and seaside resort architecture.
German artists, writers and gallerists like Siegfried Bing, Georg Hirth and Bruno Möhring also contributed to the development of Art Nouveau at the turn of the 20th century, known as Jugendstil in German.
[245]
Resort architecture on Rügen, timber framing in Bernkastel, the Schloss Neuschwanstein and the Elbe Philharmonic in Hamburg.
Expressionist architecture developed in the 1910s in Germany and influenced Art Deco and other modern styles, with e.
g.
Fritz Höger, Erich Mendelsohn, Dominikus Böhm and Fritz Schumacher being influential architects.
Germany was particularly important in the early modernist movement: it is the home of Werkbund initiated by Hermann Muthesius (New Objectivity), and of the Bauhaus movement founded by Walter Gropius.
Consequently, Germany is often considered the cradle of modern architecture and design.
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe became one of the world's most renowned architects in the second half of the 20th century.
He conceived of the glass façade skyscraper.
[246] Renowned contemporary architects and offices include Hans Kollhoff, Sergei Tchoban, KK Architekten, Helmut Jahn, Behnisch, GMP, Ole Scheeren, J.
, OM Ungers, Gottfried Böhm and Frei Otto (the last two being Pritzker Prize winners).
The Brothers Grimm collected and published popular German folk tales.
German literature can be traced back to the Middle Ages and the works of writers such as Walther von der Vogelweide and Wolfram von Eschenbach.
Well-known German authors include Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Friedrich Schiller, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing and Theodor Fontane.
The collections of folk tales published by the Brothers Grimm popularised German folklore on an international level.
[248] The Grimms also gathered and codified regional variants of the German language, grounding their work in historical principles; their Deutsches Wörterbuch, or German Dictionary, sometimes called the Grimm dictionary, was begun in 1838 and the first volumes published in 1854.
[249]
Influential authors of the 20th century include Gerhart Hauptmann, Thomas Mann, Hermann Hesse, Heinrich Böll and Günter Grass.
[250] German-speaking book publishers produce some 700 million books every year, with about 80,000 titles, nearly 60,000 of them new.
Germany comes third in quantity of books published, after the English and Chinese speaking book markets.
[251] The Frankfurt Book Fair is the most important in the world for international deals and trading, with a tradition spanning over 500 years,[252] also the Leipzig Book Fair retains a major position in Europe.
[253]
German philosophy is historically significant: Gottfried Leibniz's contributions to rationalism; the enlightenment philosophy by Immanuel Kant; the establishment of classical German idealism by Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling; Arthur Schopenhauer's composition of metaphysical pessimism; the formulation of communist theory by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels; Friedrich Nietzsche's development of perspectivism; Gottlob Frege's contributions to the dawn of analytic philosophy; Martin Heidegger's works on Being; and the development of the Frankfurt school by Max Horkheimer, Theodor Adorno, Herbert Marcuse and Jürgen Habermas have been particularly influential.
[254]
Deutsche Welle headquarters in Bonn (center).
The largest internationally operating media companies in Germany are the Bertelsmann enterprise, Axel Springer SE and ProSiebenSat.
1 Media.
The German Press Agency DPA is also significant.
Germany's television market is the largest in Europe, with some 38 million TV households.
[255] Around 90% of German households have cable or satellite TV, with a variety of free-to-view public and commercial channels.
[256] There are more than 500 public and private radio stations in Germany, with the public Deutsche Welle being the main German radio and television broadcaster in foreign languages.
[257] Germany's national radio network is the Deutschlandradio while ARD stations are covering local services.
Many of Europe's best-selling newspapers and magazines are produced in Germany. The papers (and internet portals) with the highest circulation are Bild (a tabloid), Die Zeit, Süddeutsche Zeitung, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung and Die Welt, the largest magazines include Der Spiegel, Stern and Focus.
[258]
The German video gaming market is one of the largest in the world.[259] The Gamescom in Cologne is the world's leading gaming convention.
[260] Popular game series from Germany include Turrican, the Anno series, The Settlers series, the Gothic series, SpellForce, the FIFA Manager series, Far Cry and Crysis.
Relevant game developers and publishers are Blue Byte, Crytek, Deep Silver, Kalypso Media, Piranha Bytes, Yager Development, and some of the largest social network game companies like Bigpoint, Gameforge, Goodgame and Wooga.
[261]
German cinema has made major technical and artistic contributions to film. The first works of the Skladanowsky Brothers were shown to an audience in 1895.
The renowned Babelsberg Studio in Berlin's suburb Potsdam was established in 1912, thus being the first large-scale film studio in the world.
Today it is Europe's largest studio.
[262] Early German cinema was particularly influential with German expressionists such as Robert Wiene and Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau.
Director Fritz Lang's Metropolis (1927) is referred to as the first major science-fiction film.
[263] In 1930 Josef von Sternberg directed The Blue Angel, the first major German sound film, with Marlene Dietrich.
[264] Films of Leni Riefenstahl set new artistic standards, in particular Triumph of the Will.
[265]
Babelsberg Studio near Berlin, the world's first large-scale film studio
After 1945, many of the films of the immediate post-war period can be characterised as Trümmerfilm. Such films included Wolfgang Staudte's Die Mörder sind unter uns (The Murderers are among us) (1946).
Notable East German films included Der Untertan (1951); Konrad Wolf's Der geteilte Himmel (Divided Heaven) (1964) and Frank Beyer's Jacob the Liar (1975).
The defining film genre in West Germany of the 1950s was arguably the Heimatfilm ("homeland film"); these films depicted the beauty of the land and the moral integrity of the people living in it.
[266]
During the 1970s and 1980s, New German Cinema directors such as Volker Schlöndorff, Werner Herzog, Wim Wenders, and Rainer Werner Fassbinder brought West German auteur cinema to critical acclaim.
German movies such as Das Boot (1981), The Never Ending Story (1984), Good Bye, Lenin! (2003), Head On (2004), The White Ribbon (2009), Animals United (2010), and Cloud Atlas (2012) also had international success.
The Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film ("Oscar") went to the German production Die Blechtrommel (The Tin Drum) in 1979, to Nirgendwo in Afrika (Nowhere in Africa) in 2002, and to Das Leben der Anderen (The Lives of Others) in 2007.
[267]
The annual European Film Awards ceremony is held every other year in Berlin, home of the European Film Academy.
The Berlin International Film Festival, known as "Berlinale", awarding the "Golden Bear" and held annually since 1951, is one of the world's leading film festivals.
[268] The "Lolas" are annually awarded in Berlin, at the German Film Awards, that have been presented since 1951.
[269]
German cuisine varies from region to region and often neighboring regions share some culinary similarities (e.
g.
the southern regions of Bavaria and Swabia share some traditions with Switzerland and Austria).
International varieties such as pizza, sushi, Chinese food, Greek food, Indian cuisine and doner kebab are also popular and available, thanks to diverse ethnic communities.
Bread is a significant part of German cuisine and German bakeries produce about 600 main types of bread and 1,200 different types of pastries and rolls (Brötchen).
German cheeses account for about a third of all cheese produced in Europe.
[270] In 2012 over 99% of all meat produced in Germany was either pork, chicken or beef.
Germans produce their ubiquitous sausages in almost 1,500 varieties, including Bratwursts, Weisswursts, and Currywursts.
[271] In 2012, organic foods accounted for 3.
9% of total food sales.
[272]
Although wine is becoming more popular in many parts of Germany, especially in German wine regions,[273] the national alcoholic drink is beer.
German beer consumption per person stands at 110 litres (24 imp gal; 29 US gal) in 2013 and remains among the highest in the world.
[274] German beer purity regulations date back to the 15th century.
[275]
The Michelin Guide of 2015 awarded eleven restaurants in Germany three stars, the highest designation, while 38 more received two stars and 233 one star.
[276] Overall, German restaurants have become the world's second-most decorated after France.
[277][278]
The German national football team after winning the FIFA World Cup for the fourth time in 2014. Football is the most popular sport in Germany.
Twenty-seven million Germans are members of a sports club and an additional twelve million pursue sports individually.
[279] Association football is the most popular sport.
With more than 6.
3 million official members, the German Football Association (Deutscher Fußball-Bund) is the largest sports organisation of its kind worldwide, and the German top league, the Bundesliga, attracts the second highest average attendance of all professional sports leagues in the world.
[279] The German men's national football team won the FIFA World Cup in 1954, 1974, 1990, and 2014 and the UEFA European Championship in 1972, 1980 and 1996.
Germany hosted the FIFA World Cup in 1974 and 2006 and the UEFA European Championship in 1988.
Other popular spectator sports include winter sports, boxing, basketball, handball, volleyball, ice hockey, tennis, horse riding and golf.
Water sports like sailing, rowing, and swimming are popular in Germany as well.
[279]
Germany is one of the leading motor sports countries in the world. Constructors like BMW and Mercedes are prominent manufacturers in motor sport.
Porsche has won the 24 Hours of Le Mans race 17 times, and Audi 13 times (as of 2015).
The driver Michael Schumacher has set many motor sport records during his career, having won more Formula One World Drivers' Championships with seven titles, than any other.
He is one of the highest paid sportsmen in history.
[280] Sebastian Vettel is also among the top three most successful Formula One drivers of all time.
[281]
Historically, German athletes have been successful contenders in the Olympic Games, ranking third in an all-time Olympic Games medal count (when combining East and West German medals).
Germany was the last country to host both the summer and winter games in the same year, in 1936 the Berlin Summer Games and the Winter Games in Garmisch-Partenkirchen,[282] and in Munich it hosted the Summer Games of 1972.
[283]
German designers were leaders of modern product design, with the Bauhaus designers like Mies van der Rohe, and Dieter Rams of Braun being essential.
[284]
Germany is a leading country in the fashion industry. The German textile industry consisted of about 1,300 companies with more than 130,000 employees in 2010, which generated a revenue of 28 billion Euro.
Almost 44 percent of the products are exported.
[285] The Berlin Fashion Week and the fashion trade fair Bread & Butter are held twice a year.
[286]
Munich, Hamburg and Düsseldorf are also important design, production and trade hubs of the domestic fashion industry, among smaller towns.
[287] Renowned fashion designers from Germany include Karl Lagerfeld, Jil Sander, Wolfgang Joop, Philipp Plein and Michael Michalsky.
Important brands include Hugo Boss, Escada, Adidas, Puma and Triumph.
The German supermodels Claudia Schiffer, Heidi Klum, Tatjana Patitz and Nadja Auermann came to international fame,[288] as well as Toni Garrn, Julia Stegner and Diane Kruger.
Australia (/ɒˈstreɪliə/, /ə-/, colloquially /-jə/),[10][11] officially known as the Commonwealth of Australia,[12] is an Oceanian country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania, and numerous smaller islands.
It is the world's sixth-largest country by total area.
Neighbouring countries include Papua New Guinea, Indonesia and East Timor to the north; the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to the north-east; and New Zealand to the south-east.
For about 50,000 years[13] before the first British settlement in the late 18th century,[14][15] Australia was inhabited by indigenous Australians,[16] who spoke languages grouped into roughly 250 language groups.
[17][18] After the European discovery of the continent by Dutch explorers in 1606, Australia's eastern half was claimed by Great Britain in 1770 and initially settled through penal transportation to the colony of New South Wales from 26 January 1788.
The population grew steadily in subsequent decades; the continent was explored and an additional five self-governing crown colonies were established.
On 1 January 1901, the six colonies federated, forming the Commonwealth of Australia.
Since federation, Australia has maintained a stable liberal democratic political system that functions as a federal parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy comprising six states and several territories.
The population of 24 million[5] is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated in the eastern states and on the coast.
Australia is a developed country and one of the wealthiest in the world, with the world's 12th-largest economy.
In 2014 Australia had the world's fifth-highest per capita income.
[20] Australia's military expenditure is the world's 13th-largest.
With the second-highest human development index globally, Australia ranks highly in many international comparisons of national performance, such as quality of life, health, education, economic freedom, and the protection of civil liberties and political rights.
[21] Australia is a member of the United Nations, G20, Commonwealth of Nations, ANZUS, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, and the Pacific Islands Forum.
The name Australia (pronounced [əˈstɹæɪljə, -liə] in Australian English,[22]) is derived from the Latin Terra Australis ("southern land") a name used for putative lands in the southern hemisphere since ancient times.
[23] The earliest recorded use of the word Australia in English was in 1625 in "A note of Australia del Espíritu Santo, written by Sir Richard Hakluyt", published by Samuel Purchas in Hakluytus Posthumus, a corruption of the original Spanish name "Austrialia del Espíritu Santo" (Southern Land of the Holy Spirit)[24][25][26] for an island in Vanuatu.
[27] The Dutch adjectival form Australische was used in a Dutch book in Batavia (Jakarta) in 1638, to refer to the newly discovered lands to the south.
[28] The first time that the name Australia appears to have been officially used was in a despatch to Lord Bathurst of 4 April 1817 in which Governor Lachlan Macquarie acknowledges the receipt of Capt.
[29] On 12 December 1817, Macquarie recommended to the Colonial Office that it be formally adopted.
[30] In 1824, the Admiralty agreed that the continent should be known officially as Australia.
Aboriginal rock art in the Kimberley region of Western Australia
Human habitation of the Australian continent is estimated to have begun between 42,000 and 48,000 years ago,[32][33] possibly with the migration of people by land bridges and short sea-crossings from what is now Southeast Asia.
These first inhabitants may have been ancestors of modern Indigenous Australians.
[34] At the time of European settlement in the late 18th century, most Indigenous Australians were hunter-gatherers, with a complex oral culture and spiritual values based on reverence for the land and a belief in the Dreamtime.
The Torres Strait Islanders, ethnically Melanesian, were originally horticulturalists and hunter-gatherers.
[35] The northern coasts and waters of Australia were visited sporadically by fishermen from Maritime Southeast Asia.
[36]
A painting of Captain James Cook in uniform sitting down in front of a map
Portrait of Captain James Cook, the first European to map the eastern coastline of Australia in 1770
The first recorded European sighting of the Australian mainland, and the first recorded European landfall on the Australian continent, are attributed to the Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon.
He sighted the coast of Cape York Peninsula in early 1606, and made landfall on 26 February at the Pennefather River near the modern town of Weipa on Cape York.
[37] The Dutch charted the whole of the western and northern coastlines and named the island continent "New Holland" during the 17th century, but made no attempt at settlement.
[37] William Dampier, an English explorer and privateer, landed on the north-west coast of New Holland in 1688 and again in 1699 on a return trip.
[38] In 1770, James Cook sailed along and mapped the east coast, which he named New South Wales and claimed for Great Britain.
[39] With the loss of its American colonies in 1783, the British Government sent a fleet of ships, the "First Fleet", under the command of Captain Arthur Phillip, to establish a new penal colony in New South Wales.
A camp was set up and the flag raised at Sydney Cove, Port Jackson, on 26 January 1788,[15] a date which became Australia's national day, Australia Day, although the British Crown Colony of New South Wales was not formally promulgated until 7 February 1788.
The first settlement led to the foundation of Sydney, and the exploration and settlement of other regions.
A calm body of water is in the foreground. The shoreline is about 200 metres away. To the left, close to the shore, are three tall gum trees; behind them on an incline are ruins, including walls and watchtowers of light-coloured stone and brick, what appear to be the foundations of walls, and grassed areas.
To the right lie the outer walls of a large rectangular four-storey building dotted with regularly spaced windows.
Forested land rises gently to a peak several kilometres back from the shore.
Tasmania's Port Arthur penal settlement is one of eleven UNESCO World Heritage-listed Australian Convict Sites.
A British settlement was established in Van Diemen's Land, now known as Tasmania, in 1803, and it became a separate colony in 1825.
[40] The United Kingdom formally claimed the western part of Western Australia (the Swan River Colony) in 1828.
[41] Separate colonies were carved from parts of New South Wales: South Australia in 1836, Victoria in 1851, and Queensland in 1859.
[42] The Northern Territory was founded in 1911 when it was excised from South Australia.
[43] South Australia was founded as a "free province"—it was never a penal colony.
[44] Victoria and Western Australia were also founded "free", but later accepted transported convicts.
[45][46] A campaign by the settlers of New South Wales led to the end of convict transportation to that colony; the last convict ship arrived in 1848.
[47]
The indigenous population, estimated to have been between 750,000 and 1,000,000 in 1788,[48] declined for 150 years following settlement, mainly due to infectious disease.
[49] Thousands more died as a result of frontier conflict with settlers.
[50] A government policy of "assimilation" beginning with the Aboriginal Protection Act 1869 resulted in the removal of many Aboriginal children from their families and communities—often referred to as the Stolen Generations—a practice which may also have contributed to the decline in the indigenous population.
[51] The Federal government gained the power to make laws with respect to Aborigines following the 1967 referendum.
[52] Traditional ownership of land—aboriginal title—was not recognised until 1992, when the High Court case Mabo v Queensland (No 2) overturned the legal doctrine that Australia had been terra nullius ("land belonging to no one") before the European occupation.
A gold rush began in Australia in the early 1850s[54] and the Eureka Rebellion against mining licence fees in 1854 was an early expression of civil disobedience.
[55] Between 1855 and 1890, the six colonies individually gained responsible government, managing most of their own affairs while remaining part of the British Empire.
[56] The Colonial Office in London retained control of some matters, notably foreign affairs[57] defence,[58] and international shipping.
Photo of an ANZAC memorial with an elderly man playing a bugle. Rows of people are seated behind the memorial.
Many small white crosses with red poppies have been stuck into the lawn in rows on either side of the memorial.
The Last Post is played at an Anzac Day ceremony in Port Melbourne, Victoria. Similar ceremonies are held in most suburbs and towns.
On 1 January 1901, federation of the colonies was achieved after a decade of planning, consultation and voting.
[59] This established the Commonwealth of Australia as a dominion of the British Empire.
[60] The Federal Capital Territory (later renamed the Australian Capital Territory) was formed in 1911 as the location for the future federal capital of Canberra.
Melbourne was the temporary seat of government from 1901 to 1927 while Canberra was being constructed.
[61] The Northern Territory was transferred from the control of the South Australian government to the federal parliament in 1911.
[62] In 1914, Australia joined Britain in fighting World War I, with support from both the outgoing Commonwealth Liberal Party and the incoming Australian Labor Party.
[63][64] Australians took part in many of the major battles fought on the Western Front.
[65] Of about 416,000 who served, about 60,000 were killed and another 152,000 were wounded.
[66] Many Australians regard the defeat of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs) at Gallipoli as the birth of the nation—its first major military action.
[67][68] The Kokoda Track campaign is regarded by many as an analogous nation-defining event during World War II.
Britain's Statute of Westminster 1931 formally ended most of the constitutional links between Australia and the UK.
Australia adopted it in 1942,[70] but it was backdated to 1939 to confirm the validity of legislation passed by the Australian Parliament during World War II.
[71][72] The shock of the United Kingdom's defeat in Asia in 1942 and the threat of Japanese invasion caused Australia to turn to the United States as a new ally and protector.
[73] Since 1951, Australia has been a formal military ally of the US, under the ANZUS treaty.
[74] After World War II Australia encouraged immigration from Europe.
Since the 1970s and following the abolition of the White Australia policy, immigration from Asia and elsewhere was also promoted.
[75] As a result, Australia's demography, culture, and self-image were transformed.
[76] The final constitutional ties between Australia and the UK were severed with the passing of the Australia Act 1986, ending any British role in the government of the Australian States, and closing the option of judicial appeals to the Privy Council in London.
[77] In a 1999 referendum, 55% of voters and a majority in every state rejected a proposal to become a republic with a president appointed by a two-thirds vote in both Houses of the Australian Parliament.
Since the election of the Whitlam Government in 1972,[78] there has been an increasing focus in foreign policy on ties with other Pacific Rim nations, while maintaining close ties with Australia's traditional allies and trading partners.
A large white and cream coloured building with grass on its roof. The building is topped with a large flagpole.
Parliament House was opened in Canberra in 1988, replacing the provisional Parliament House building, opened in 1927.
Australia is a constitutional monarchy with a federal division of powers. It uses a parliamentary system of government[80] with Elizabeth II at its apex as the Queen of Australia, a role that is distinct from her position as monarch of the other Commonwealth realms.
The Queen resides in the United Kingdom and is represented in Australia by the Governor-General at the federal level and by the Governors at the state level, who by convention act on the advice of her ministers.
[81][82] The most notable exercise to date of the Governor-General's reserve powers outside the Prime Minister's request was the dismissal of the Whitlam Government in the constitutional crisis of 1975.
[83]
The federal government is separated into three branches:
The legislature: the bicameral Parliament, defined in section 1 of the constitution as comprising the Queen (represented by the Governor-General), the Senate, and the House of Representatives;
The executive: the Federal Executive Council, in practice the Governor-General as advised by the Prime Minister and Ministers of State;[84]
The judiciary: the High Court of Australia and other federal courts, whose judges are appointed by the Governor-General on advice of the Council.
Malcolm Turnbull, Prime Minister of Australia
Peter Cosgrove, Governor-General of Australia
In the Senate (the upper house), there are 76 senators: twelve each from the states and two each from the mainland territories (the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory).
[85] The House of Representatives (the lower house) has 150 members elected from single-member electoral divisions, commonly known as "electorates" or "seats", allocated to states on the basis of population,[86] with each original state guaranteed a minimum of five seats.
[87] Elections for both chambers are normally held every three years, simultaneously; senators have overlapping six-year terms except for those from the territories, whose terms are not fixed but are tied to the electoral cycle for the lower house; thus only 40 of the 76 places in the Senate are put to each election unless the cycle is interrupted by a double dissolution.
Australia's electoral system uses preferential voting for all lower house elections with the exception of Tasmania and the ACT which, along with the Senate and most state upper houses, combine it with proportional representation in a system known as the single transferable vote.
Voting is compulsory for all enrolled citizens 18 years and over in every jurisdiction,[88] as is enrolment (with the exception of South Australia).
[89] The party with majority support in the House of Representatives forms the government and its leader becomes Prime Minister.
In cases where no party has majority support, the Governor-General has the constitutional power to appoint the Prime Minister and, if necessary, dismiss one that has lost the confidence of Parliament.
[90]
There are two major political groups that usually form government, federally and in the states: the Australian Labor Party and the Coalition which is a formal grouping of the Liberal Party and its minor partner, the National Party.
[91][92] Within Australian political culture, the Coalition is considered centre-right and the Labor Party is considered centre-left.
[93] Independent members and several minor parties have achieved representation in Australian parliaments, mostly in upper houses.
Following a partyroom leadership challenge, Julia Gillard became the first female Prime Minister in June 2010.
[94] The most recent federal election was held on 7 September 2013 and resulted in a majority government for the Coalition.
Liberal Party leader Tony Abbott was sworn into office as Prime Minister by the Governor-General of Australia on 18 September.
In September 2015, Malcolm Turnbull successfully challenged Abbott for leadership of the Coalition, and was sworn in as Prime Minister on the 15th.
[95] With five Prime Ministers in as many years between 2010 and 2015, with most of those leadership changes occurring through leadership spills rather than general elections, Australia has been described as the "coup capital of the democratic world".
[96]
A clickable map of Australia's states and mainland territories
Australia has six states—New South Wales (NSW), Queensland (QLD), South Australia (SA), Tasmania (TAS), Victoria (VIC) and Western Australia (WA)—and two major mainland territories—the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) and the Northern Territory (NT).
In most respects these two territories function as states, but the Commonwealth Parliament can override any legislation of their parliaments.
By contrast, federal legislation overrides state legislation only in areas that are set out in Section 51 of the Australian Constitution; state parliaments retain all residual legislative powers, including those over schools, state police, the state judiciary, roads, public transport and local government, since these do not fall under the provisions listed in Section 51.
[97]
Each state and major mainland territory has its own parliament—unicameral in the Northern Territory, the ACT and Queensland, and bicameral in the other states.
The states are sovereign entities, although subject to certain powers of the Commonwealth as defined by the Constitution.
The lower houses are known as the Legislative Assembly (the House of Assembly in South Australia and Tasmania); the upper houses are known as the Legislative Council.
The head of the government in each state is the Premier and in each territory the Chief Minister.
The Queen is represented in each state by a Governor; and in the Northern Territory, the Administrator.
[98] In the Commonwealth, the Queen's representative is the Governor-General.
[99]
The federal parliament directly administers the following territories:[84]
Jervis Bay Territory, a naval base and sea port for the national capital in land that was formerly part of New South Wales
The external territory of Norfolk Island previously exercised considerable autonomy under the Norfolk Island Act 1979 through its own legislative assembly and an Administrator to represent the Queen.
[100] In 2015, the Commonwealth Parliament abolished self-government, integrating Norfolk Island into the Australian tax and welfare systems and replacing its legislative assembly with a council.
[101]
Macquarie Island is administered by Tasmania, and Lord Howe Island by New South Wales.
A group of Australian soldiers with rifles moving along a path in a wooded area
Australian Army soldiers conducting a foot patrol during a joint training exercise with US forces in Shoalwater Bay (2007).
Over recent decades, Australia's foreign relations have been driven by a close association with the United States through the ANZUS pact, and by a desire to develop relationships with Asia and the Pacific, particularly through ASEAN and the Pacific Islands Forum.
In 2005 Australia secured an inaugural seat at the East Asia Summit following its accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, and in 2011 attended the Sixth East Asia Summit in Indonesia.
Australia is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, in which the Commonwealth Heads of Government meetings provide the main forum for co-operation.
[102]
Australia has pursued the cause of international trade liberalisation.[103] It led the formation of the Cairns Group and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
[104][105] Australia is a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the World Trade Organization,[106][107] and has pursued several major bilateral free trade agreements, most recently the Australia–United States Free Trade Agreement[108] and Closer Economic Relations with New Zealand,[109] with another free trade agreement being negotiated with China—the Australia–China Free Trade Agreement—and Japan,[110] South Korea in 2011,[111][112] Australia–Chile Free Trade Agreement, and as of November 2015 has put the Trans-Pacific Partnership before parliament for ratification.
[113]
Along with New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Malaysia and Singapore, Australia is party to the Five Power Defence Arrangements, a regional defence agreement.
A founding member country of the United Nations, Australia is strongly committed to multilateralism[114] and maintains an international aid program under which some 60 countries receive assistance.
The 2005–06 budget provides A$2.
5 billion for development assistance.
[115] Australia ranks fifteenth overall in the Center for Global Development's 2012 Commitment to Development Index.
[116]
Australia's armed forces—the Australian Defence Force (ADF)—comprise the Royal Australian Navy (RAN), the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF), in total numbering 81,214 personnel (including 57,982 regulars and 23,232 reservists) as of November 2015.
The titular role of Commander-in-Chief is vested in the Governor-General, who appoints a Chief of the Defence Force from one of the armed services on the advice of the government.
[117] Day-to-day force operations are under the command of the Chief, while broader administration and the formulation of defence policy is undertaken by the Minister and Department of Defence.
In the 2015–16 budget, defence spending was A$31.9 billion or 1.92% of GDP,[118] representing the 13th largest defence budget.
[119] Australia has been involved in UN and regional peacekeeping, disaster relief and armed conflict, including the 2003 invasion of Iraq; it currently has deployed about 2,241 personnel in varying capacities to 12 international operations in areas including Iraq and Afghanistan.
[120]
Australia divided into different colours indicating its climatic zones
Australia's landmass of 7,617,930 square kilometres (2,941,300 sq mi)[121] is on the Indo-Australian Plate.
Surrounded by the Indian and Pacific oceans,[N 5] it is separated from Asia by the Arafura and Timor seas, with the Coral Sea lying off the Queensland coast, and the Tasman Sea lying between Australia and New Zealand.
The world's smallest continent[123] and sixth largest country by total area,[124] Australia—owing to its size and isolation—is often dubbed the "island continent",[125] and is sometimes considered the world's largest island.
[126] Australia has 34,218 kilometres (21,262 mi) of coastline (excluding all offshore islands),[127] and claims an extensive Exclusive Economic Zone of 8,148,250 square kilometres (3,146,060 sq mi).
This exclusive economic zone does not include the Australian Antarctic Territory.
[128] Apart from Macquarie Island, Australia lies between latitudes 9° and 44°S, and longitudes 112° and 154°E.
The Great Barrier Reef, the world's largest coral reef,[129] lies a short distance off the north-east coast and extends for over 2,000 kilometres (1,240 mi).
Mount Augustus, claimed to be the world's largest monolith,[130] is located in Western Australia.
At 2,228 metres (7,310 ft), Mount Kosciuszko on the Great Dividing Range is the highest mountain on the Australian mainland.
Even taller are Mawson Peak (at 2,745 metres or 9,006 feet), on the remote Australian territory of Heard Island, and, in the Australian Antarctic Territory, Mount McClintock and Mount Menzies, at 3,492 metres (11,457 ft) and 3,355 metres (11,007 ft) respectively.
[131]
Coral of the Great Barrier Reef, the world's largest coral reef system.
Australia's size gives it a wide variety of landscapes, with tropical rainforests in the north-east, mountain ranges in the south-east, south-west and east, and dry desert in the centre.
[132] It is the flattest continent,[133] with the oldest and least fertile soils;[134][135] desert or semi-arid land commonly known as the outback makes up by far the largest portion of land.
[136] The driest inhabited continent, its annual rainfall averaged over continental area is less than 500 mm.
[137] The population density, 2.
8 inhabitants per square kilometre, is among the lowest in the world,[138] although a large proportion of the population lives along the temperate south-eastern coastline.
[139]
Eastern Australia is marked by the Great Dividing Range, which runs parallel to the coast of Queensland, New South Wales and much of Victoria.
The name is not strictly accurate, because parts of the range consist of low hills, and the highlands are typically no more than 1,600 metres (5,249 ft) in height.
[140] The coastal uplands and a belt of Brigalow grasslands lie between the coast and the mountains, while inland of the dividing range are large areas of grassland.
[140][141] These include the western plains of New South Wales, and the Einasleigh Uplands, Barkly Tableland, and Mulga Lands of inland Queensland.
The northernmost point of the east coast is the tropical-rainforested Cape York Peninsula.
[142][143][144][145]
Map showing the topography of Australia, showing some elevation in the west and very high elevation in mountains in the southeast
Topographic map of Australia. Dark green represents the lowest elevation and dark brown the highest
The landscapes of the Top End and the Gulf Country—with their tropical climate—include forest, woodland, wetland, grassland, rainforest and desert.
[146][147][148] At the north-west corner of the continent are the sandstone cliffs and gorges of The Kimberley, and below that the Pilbara.
To the south of these and inland, lie more areas of grassland: the Ord Victoria Plain and the Western Australian Mulga shrublands.
[149][150][151] At the heart of the country are the uplands of central Australia.
Prominent features of the centre and south include Uluru (also known as Ayers Rock), the famous sandstone monolith, and the inland Simpson, Tirari and Sturt Stony, Gibson, Great Sandy, Tanami, and Great Victoria deserts, with the famous Nullarbor Plain on the southern coast.
[152][153][154][155]
The climate of Australia is significantly influenced by ocean currents, including the Indian Ocean Dipole and the El Niño–Southern Oscillation, which is correlated with periodic drought, and the seasonal tropical low-pressure system that produces cyclones in northern Australia.
[156][157] These factors cause rainfall to vary markedly from year to year.
Much of the northern part of the country has a tropical, predominantly summer-rainfall (monsoon) climate.
[137] The south-west corner of the country has a Mediterranean climate.
[158] Much of the south-east (including Tasmania) is temperate.
[137]
A koala holding onto a eucalyptus tree with its head turned so both eyes are visible
The koala and the Eucalyptus form an iconic Australian pair.
Although most of Australia is semi-arid or desert, it includes a diverse range of habitats from alpine heaths to tropical rainforests, and is recognised as a megadiverse country.
Fungi typify that diversity; an estimated 250,000 species—of which only 5% have been described—occur in Australia.
[159] Because of the continent's great age, extremely variable weather patterns, and long-term geographic isolation, much of Australia's biota is unique.
About 85% of flowering plants, 84% of mammals, more than 45% of birds, and 89% of in-shore, temperate-zone fish are endemic.
[160] Australia has the greatest number of reptiles of any country, with 755 species.
[161]
Australian forests are mostly made up of evergreen species, particularly eucalyptus trees in the less arid regions; wattles replace them as the dominant species in drier regions and deserts.
[162] Among well-known Australian animals are the monotremes (the platypus and echidna); a host of marsupials, including the kangaroo, koala, and wombat, and birds such as the emu and the kookaburra.
[162] Australia is home to many dangerous animals including some of the most venomous snakes in the world.
[163] The dingo was introduced by Austronesian people who traded with Indigenous Australians around 3000 BCE.
[164] Many animal and plant species became extinct soon after first human settlement,[165] including the Australian megafauna; others have disappeared since European settlement, among them the thylacine.
Many of Australia's ecoregions, and the species within those regions, are threatened by human activities and introduced animal, chromistan, fungal and plant species.
[168] All these factors have led to Australia having the highest mammal extinction rate of any country in the world.
[169] The federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 is the legal framework for the protection of threatened species.
[170] Numerous protected areas have been created under the National Strategy for the Conservation of Australia's Biological Diversity to protect and preserve unique ecosystems;[171][172] 65 wetlands are listed under the Ramsar Convention,[173] and 16 natural World Heritage Sites have been established.
[174] Australia was ranked 3rd out of 178 countries in the world on the 2014 Environmental Performance Index.
Drought affecting Lake Hume on the Upper Murray River
Protection of the environment is a major political issue in Australia.[176][177] In 2007, the First Rudd Government signed the instrument of ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
Nevertheless, Australia's carbon dioxide emissions per capita are among the highest in the world, lower than those of only a few other industrialised nations.
[178] Rainfall in southwestern Australia has decreased by 10–20% since the 1970s, while southeastern Australia has also experienced a moderate decline since the 1990s.
[179]
According to the Bureau of Meteorology's 2011 Australian Climate Statement, Australia had lower than average temperatures in 2011 as a consequence of a La Niña weather pattern; however, "the country's 10-year average continues to demonstrate the rising trend in temperatures, with 2002–2011 likely to rank in the top two warmest 10-year periods on record for Australia, at 0.
52 °C (0.
94 °F) above the long-term average".
[180] Furthermore, 2014 was Australia's third warmest year since national temperature observations commenced in 1910.
[181][182] Water restrictions are frequently in place in many regions and cities of Australia in response to chronic shortages due to urban population increases and localised drought.
[183][184] Throughout much of the continent, major flooding regularly follows extended periods of drought, flushing out inland river systems, overflowing dams and inundating large inland flood plains, as occurred throughout Eastern Australia in 2010, 2011 and 2012 after the 2000s Australian drought.
A carbon tax was introduced in 2012 and helped to reduce Australia's emissions but was scrapped in 2014 under the Liberal Government.
[185] Since the carbon tax was repealed, emissions have again continued to rise.
[186]
Australian biota has been severely impacted by changes occurring since European settlement began in 1788,[187] with more than 10% of mammal species lost in the past 225 years.
[188] There have also been 23 bird species or subspecies,[189] 4 amphibians and more than 60 plant species known to be lost during this period.
[187] The Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act of 1999 was designed to minimise further impacts on ecological communities in Australia and its territories.
[190]
A deep opencut mine in which some roads can be seen, the dirt is a rusty colour
The Super Pit gold mine in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, is the nation's largest open cut mine.[191]
Australia is a wealthy country; it generates its income from various sources including mining-related exports, telecommunications, banking and manufacturing.
[192][193][194] It has a market economy, a relatively high GDP per capita, and a relatively low rate of poverty.
In terms of average wealth, Australia ranked second in the world after Switzerland in 2013, although the nation's poverty rate increased from 10.
2% to 11.
8%, from 2000/01 to 2013.
[195][196] It was identified by the Credit Suisse Research Institute as the nation with the highest median wealth in the world and the second-highest average wealth per adult in 2013.
[195]
The Australian dollar is the currency for the nation, including Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, and Norfolk Island, as well as the independent Pacific Island states of Kiribati, Nauru, and Tuvalu.
With the 2006 merger of the Australian Stock Exchange and the Sydney Futures Exchange, the Australian Securities Exchange became the ninth largest in the world.
[197]
Ranked third in the Index of Economic Freedom (2010),[198] Australia is the world's twelfth largest economy and has the fifth highest per capita GDP (nominal) at $66,984.
The country was ranked second in the United Nations 2011 Human Development Index and first in Legatum's 2008 Prosperity Index.
[199] All of Australia's major cities fare well in global comparative livability surveys;[200] Melbourne reached top spot for the fourth year in a row on The Economist's 2014 list of the world's most liveable cities, followed by Adelaide, Sydney, and Perth in the fifth, seventh, and ninth places respectively.
[201] Total government debt in Australia is about $190 billion[202] – 20% of GDP in 2010.
[203] Australia has among the highest house prices and some of the highest household-debt levels in the world.
World map showing the distribution of Australian goods
Destination and value of Australian exports in 2006[205]
An emphasis on exporting commodities rather than manufactured goods has underpinned a significant increase in Australia's terms of trade since the start of the 21st century, due to rising commodity prices.
Australia has a balance of payments that is more than 7% of GDP negative, and has had persistently large current account deficits for more than 50 years.
[206] Australia has grown at an average annual rate of 3.
6% for over 15 years, in comparison to the OECD annual average of 2.
5%.
[206] Australia was the only advanced economy not to experience a recession due to the global financial downturn in 2008–2009.
[207] However, the economies of six of Australia's major trading partners have been in recession, which in turn has affected Australia, significantly hampering its economic growth in recent years.
[208][209] From 2012 to early 2013, Australia's national economy grew, but some non-mining states and Australia's non-mining economy experienced a recession.
The Hawke Government floated the Australian dollar in 1983 and partially deregulated the financial system.
[213] The Howard Government followed with a partial deregulation of the labour market and the further privatisation of state-owned businesses, most notably in the telecommunications industry.
[214] The indirect tax system was substantially changed in July 2000 with the introduction of a 10% Goods and Services Tax (GST).
[215] In Australia's tax system, personal and company income tax are the main sources of government revenue.
[216]
In May 2012, there were 11,537,900 people employed (either full- or part-time), with an unemployment rate of 5.
1%.
[217] Youth unemployment (15–24) stood at 11.
2%.
[217] Data released in mid-November 2013 showed that the number of welfare recipients had grown by 55%.
In 2007 228,621 Newstart unemployment allowance recipients were registered, a total that increased to 646,414 in March 2013.
[218] According to the Graduate Careers Survey, full-time employment for newly qualified professionals from various occupations has declined since 2011 but it increases for graduates three years after graduation.
[219][220]
Since 2008, inflation has typically been 2–3% and the base interest rate 5–6%. The service sector of the economy, including tourism, education, and financial services, accounts for about 70% of GDP.
[221] Rich in natural resources, Australia is a major exporter of agricultural products, particularly wheat and wool, minerals such as iron-ore and gold, and energy in the forms of liquified natural gas and coal.
Although agriculture and natural resources account for only 3% and 5% of GDP respectively, they contribute substantially to export performance.
Australia's largest export markets are Japan, China, the US, South Korea, and New Zealand.
[222] Australia is the world's fourth largest exporter of wine, and the wine industry contributes $5.
5 billion per year to the nation's economy.
[223]
A beach populated by people; a city can be seen in the horizon
Australia has one of the world's most highly urbanised populations with the majority living in metropolitan cities on the coast.
(Pictured: Gold Coast beach and skyline, Queensland).
For generations, the vast majority of immigrants came from the British Isles, and the people of Australia are still mainly of British or Irish ethnic origin.
In the 2011 Australian census, the most commonly nominated ancestry was English (36.
1%), followed by Australian (35.
4%),[224] Irish (10.
4%), Scottish (8.
9%), Italian (4.
6%), German (4.
5%), Chinese (4.
3%), Indian (2.
0%), Greek (1.
9%), and Dutch (1.
7%).
[225]
Australia's population has quadrupled since the end of World War I,[226] much of this increase from immigration.
Following World War II and through to 2000, almost 5.
9 million of the total population settled in the country as new immigrants, meaning that nearly two out of every seven Australians were born in another country.
[227] Most immigrants are skilled,[228] but the immigration quota includes categories for family members and refugees.
[228] By 2050, Australia's population is currently projected to reach around 42 million.
[229] Nevertheless, its population density, 2.
8 inhabitants per square kilometre, remains among the lowest in the world.
[138] As such, Australians have more living space per person than the inhabitants of any other nation.
[230]
In 2011, 24.6% of Australians were born elsewhere and 43.1% of people had at least one overseas-born parent;[231] the five largest immigrant groups were those from the United Kingdom, New Zealand, China, India, and Vietnam.
[232] Following the abolition of the White Australia policy in 1973, numerous government initiatives have been established to encourage and promote racial harmony based on a policy of multiculturalism.
[233] In 2005–06, more than 131,000 people emigrated to Australia, mainly from Asia and Oceania.
[234] The migration target for 2012–13 is 190,000,[235] compared to 67,900 in 1998–99.
[236]
The Indigenous population—Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders—was counted at 548,370 (2.5% of the total population) in 2011,[237] a significant increase from 115,953 in the 1976 census.
[238] The increase is partly due to many people with Indigenous heritage previously having been overlooked by the census due to undercount and cases where their Indigenous status had not been recorded on the form.
Indigenous Australians experience higher than average rates of imprisonment and unemployment, lower levels of education, and life expectancies for males and females that are, respectively, 11 and 17 years lower than those of non-indigenous Australians.
[222][239][240] Some remote Indigenous communities have been described as having "failed state"-like conditions.
[241]
In common with many other developed countries, Australia is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older population, with more retirees and fewer people of working age.
In 2004, the average age of the civilian population was 38.
8 years.
[242] A large number of Australians (759,849 for the period 2002–03;[243] 1 million or 5% of the total population in 2005[244]) live outside their home country.
Although Australia has no official language, English has always been entrenched as the de facto national language.
[2] Australian English is a major variety of the language with a distinctive accent and lexicon,[246] and differs slightly from other varieties of English in grammar and spelling.
[247] General Australian serves as the standard dialect.
According to the 2011 census, English is the only language spoken in the home for close to 81% of the population.
The next most common languages spoken at home are Mandarin (1.
7%), Italian (1.
5%), Arabic (1.
4%), Cantonese (1.
3%), Greek (1.
3%), and Vietnamese (1.
2%);[232] a considerable proportion of first- and second-generation migrants are bilingual.
A 2010–2011 study by the Australia Early Development Index found the most common language spoken by children after English was Arabic, followed by Vietnamese, Greek, Chinese, and Hindi.
Over 250 Indigenous Australian languages are thought to have existed at the time of first European contact, of which less than 20 are still in daily use by all age groups.
[250][251] About 110 others are spoken exclusively by older people.
[251] At the time of the 2006 census, 52,000 Indigenous Australians, representing 12% of the Indigenous population, reported that they spoke an Indigenous language at home.
[252] Australia has a sign language known as Auslan, which is the main language of about 5,500 deaf people.
[253]
Australia has no state religion; Section 116 of the Australian Constitution prohibits the federal government from making any law to establish any religion, impose any religious observance, or prohibit the free exercise of any religion.
[254] In the 2011 census, 61.
1% of Australians were counted as Christian, including 25.
3% as Roman Catholic and 17.
1% as Anglican; 22.
3% of the population reported having "no religion"; 7.
2% identify with non-Christian religions, the largest of these being Buddhism (2.
5%), followed by Islam (2.
2%), Hinduism (1.
3%) and Judaism (0.
5%).
The remaining 9.
4% of the population did not provide an adequate answer.
[232]
Before European settlement, the animist beliefs of Australia's indigenous people had been practised for many thousands of years.
Mainland Aboriginal Australians' spirituality is known as the Dreamtime and it places a heavy emphasis on belonging to the land.
The collection of stories that it contains shaped Aboriginal law and customs.
Aboriginal art, story and dance continue to draw on these spiritual traditions.
The spirituality and customs of Torres Strait Islanders, who inhabit the islands between Australia and New Guinea, reflected their Melanesian origins and dependence on the sea.
The 1996 Australian census counted more than 7000 respondents as followers of a traditional Aboriginal religion.
[255]
Since the arrival of the First Fleet of British ships in 1788, Christianity has grown to be the major religion practised in Australia.
Christian churches have played an integral role in the development of education, health and welfare services in Australia.
For much of Australian history the Church of England (now known as the Anglican Church of Australia) was the largest religious denomination.
However, multicultural immigration has contributed to a decline in its relative position, and the Roman Catholic Church has benefitted from recent immigration to become the largest group.
Similarly, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism and Judaism have all grown in Australia over the past half-century.
[256]
Australia has one of the lowest levels of religious adherence in the world.[257] It was reported in 2001 that only 7% of Australians attended church on a weekly basis.
[258]
Five Australian universities rank in the top 50 of the QS World University Rankings, including the Australian National University (19th).
[259]
School attendance, or registration for home schooling,[260] is compulsory throughout Australia. Education is the responsibility of the individual states and territories[261] so the rules vary between states, but in general children are required to attend school from the age of about 5 up until about 16.
[262][263] In some states (e.
g.
, Western Australia,[264] the Northern Territory[265] and New South Wales[266][267]), children aged 16–17 are required to either attend school or participate in vocational training, such as an apprenticeship.
Australia has an adult literacy rate that was estimated to be 99% in 2003.[268] However, a 2011–12 report for the Australian Bureau of Statistics reported that Tasmania has a literacy and numeracy rate of only 50%.
[269] In the Programme for International Student Assessment, Australia regularly scores among the top five of thirty major developed countries (member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development).
Catholic education accounts for the largest non-government sector.
Australia has 37 government-funded universities and two private universities, as well as a number of other specialist institutions that provide approved courses at the higher education level.
[270] The OECD places Australia among the most expensive nations to attend university.
[271] There is a state-based system of vocational training, known as TAFE, and many trades conduct apprenticeships for training new tradespeople.
[272] About 58% of Australians aged from 25 to 64 have vocational or tertiary qualifications,[222] and the tertiary graduation rate of 49% is the highest among OECD countries.
The ratio of international to local students in tertiary education in Australia is the highest in the OECD countries.
[273] In addition, 38 percent of Australia's population has a university or college degree, which is among the highest percentages in the world.
Australia has the third and seventh highest life expectancy of males and females respectively in the world.
[276] Life expectancy in Australia in 2010 was 79.
5 years for males and 84.
0 years for females.
[277] Australia has the highest rates of skin cancer in the world,[278] while cigarette smoking is the largest preventable cause of death and disease, responsible for 7.
8% of the total mortality and disease.
Ranked second in preventable causes is hypertension at 7.
6%, with obesity third at 7.
5%.
[279][280] Australia ranks 35th in the world[281] and near the top of developed nations for its proportion of obese adults [282] and nearly two thirds (63%) of its adult population is either overweight or obese.
[283]
Total expenditure on health (including private sector spending) is around 9.8% of GDP.[284] Australia introduced universal health care in 1975.
[285] Known as Medicare, it is now nominally funded by an income tax surcharge known as the Medicare levy, currently set at 1.
5%.
[286] The states manage hospitals and attached outpatient services, while the Commonwealth funds the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (subsidising the costs of medicines) and general practice.
[285]
Ornate white building with an elevated dome in the middle, fronted by a golden fountain and orange flowers
The Royal Exhibition Building in Melbourne was the first building in Australia to be listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2004.
[287]
Since 1788, the basis of Australian culture has been strongly influenced by Anglo-Celtic Western culture.
[288][289] Distinctive cultural features have also arisen from Australia's natural environment and Indigenous cultures.
[290][291] Since the mid-20th century, American popular culture has strongly influenced Australia, particularly through television and cinema.
[292] Other cultural influences come from neighbouring Asian countries, and through large-scale immigration from non-English-speaking nations.
[292][293]
The rock art of Australia's Indigenous peoples is the oldest and richest in the world, dating as far back as 60,000 years and spread across hundreds of thousands of sites.
[294] Traditional designs, patterns and stories infuse contemporary Indigenous Australian art, "the last great art movement of the 20th century";[295] its exponents include Emily Kame Kngwarreye.
[296] During the first century of European settlement, colonial artists, trained in Europe, showed a fascination with the unfamiliar land.
[297] The naturalistic, sun-filled works of Arthur Streeton, Tom Roberts and others associated with the 19th-century Heidelberg School—the first "distinctively Australian" movement in Western art—gave expression to a burgeoning Australian nationalism in the lead-up to Federation.
[297] While the school remained influential into the new century, modernists such as Margaret Preston, and, later, Sidney Nolan and Arthur Boyd, explored new artistic trends.
[297] The landscape remained a central subject matter for Fred Williams, Brett Whiteley and other post-World War II artists whose works, eclectic in style yet uniquely Australian, moved between the figurative and the abstract.
[297][298] The National Gallery of Australia and state galleries maintain collections of Australian and international art.
[299] Australia has one of the world's highest attendances of art galleries and museums per head of population.
Sidney Nolan's Snake mural (1970), held at the Museum of Old and New Art in Hobart, Tasmania, is inspired by the Aboriginal creation myth of the Rainbow Serpent, as well as desert flowers in bloom after a drought.
[301]
Australian literature grew slowly in the decades following European settlement though Indigenous oral traditions, many of which have since been recorded in writing, are much older.
[302] Writers of the 19th-century Bulletin School, such as Henry Lawson and Banjo Paterson, captured the experience of the bush using a distinctive Australian vocabulary.
Their works are still very popular; Paterson's bush poem "Waltzing Matilda" (1895) is regarded as Australia's unofficial national anthem.
[303] Miles Franklin is the namesake of Australia's most prestigious literary prize, awarded annually to the best novel about Australian life.
[304] Its first recipient, Patrick White, went on to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1973.
[305] Australian winners of the Man Booker Prize include Peter Carey, Thomas Keneally and Richard Flanagan.
[306] Author David Malouf, playwright David Williamson and poet Les Murray are also renowned literary figures.
Many of Australia's performing arts companies receive funding through the federal government's Australia Council.
[309] There is a symphony orchestra in each state,[310] and a national opera company, Opera Australia,[311] well known for its famous soprano Joan Sutherland.
[312] At the beginning of the 20th century, Nellie Melba was one of the world's leading opera singers.
[313] Ballet and dance are represented by The Australian Ballet and various state companies.
Each state has a publicly funded theatre company.
[314]
Actor playing the bushranger Ned Kelly in The Story of the Kelly Gang (1906), the world's first feature film
The Story of the Kelly Gang (1906), the world's first feature length film, spurred a boom in Australian cinema during the silent film era.
[315] After World War I, Hollywood monopolised the industry,[316] and by the 1960s Australian film production had effectively ceased.
[317] With the benefit of government support, the Australian New Wave of the 1970s brought provocative and successful films, many exploring themes of national identity, such as Wake in Fright and Gallipoli,[318] while "Crocodile" Dundee and the Ozploitation movement's Mad Max series became international blockbusters.
[319] In a film market flooded with foreign content, Australian films delivered a 7.
7% share of the local box office in 2015.
[320] The AACTAs are Australia's premier film and television awards, and notable Academy Award winners from Australia include Geoffrey Rush, Nicole Kidman, Cate Blanchett and Heath Ledger.
Australia has two public broadcasters (the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the multicultural Special Broadcasting Service), three commercial television networks, several pay-TV services,[322] and numerous public, non-profit television and radio stations.
Each major city has at least one daily newspaper,[322] and there are two national daily newspapers, The Australian and The Australian Financial Review.
[322] In 2010, Reporters Without Borders placed Australia 18th on a list of 178 countries ranked by press freedom, behind New Zealand (8th) but ahead of the United Kingdom (19th) and United States (20th).
[323] This relatively low ranking is primarily because of the limited diversity of commercial media ownership in Australia;[324] most print media are under the control of News Corporation and Fairfax Media.
Most Indigenous Australian tribal groups subsisted on a simple hunter-gatherer diet of native fauna and flora, otherwise called bush tucker.
[326][327] The first settlers introduced British food to the continent, much of which is now considered typical Australian food, such as the Sunday roast.
[328][329] Multicultural immigration transformed Australian cuisine; post-World War II European migrants, particularly from the Mediterranean, helped to build a thriving Australian coffee culture, and the influence of Asian cultures has led to Australian variants of their staple foods, such as the Chinese-inspired dim sim and Chiko Roll.
[330] Vegemite, pavlova, lamingtons and meat pies are regarded as iconic Australian foods.
[331] Australian wine is produced mainly in the southern, cooler parts of the country.
The Melbourne Cricket Ground is strongly associated with the history and development of cricket and Australian rules football, Australia's two most popular spectator sports.
[332]
About 24% of Australians over the age of 15 regularly participate in organised sporting activities.[222] At an international level, Australia has excelled at cricket, field hockey, netball, rugby league and rugby union.
[333] The majority of Australians live within the coastal zone, making the beach a popular recreation spot and an integral part of the nation's identity.
[334] Australia is a powerhouse in water-based sports, such as swimming and surfing.
[335] The surf lifesaving movement originated in Australia, and the volunteer lifesaver is one of the country's icons.
[336] Nationally, other popular sports include Australian rules football, horse racing, basketball, surfing, soccer, and motor racing.
The annual Melbourne Cup horse race and the Sydney to Hobart yacht race attract intense interest.
Australia is one of five nations to have participated in every Summer Olympics of the modern era,[338] and has hosted the Games twice: 1956 in Melbourne and 2000 in Sydney.
[339] Australia has also participated in every Commonwealth Games,[340] hosting the event in 1938, 1962, 1982, 2006 and will host the 2018 Commonwealth Games.
[341] Australia made its inaugural appearance at the Pacific Games in 2015.
As well as being a regular FIFA World Cup participant, Australia has won the OFC Nations Cup four times and the AFC Asian Cup once – the only country to have won championships in two different FIFA confederations.
[342] The country regularly competes among the world elite basketball teams as it is among the global top three teams in terms of qualifications to the Basketball Tournament at the Summer Olympics.
Other major international events held in Australia include the Australian Open tennis grand slam tournament, international cricket matches, and the Australian Formula One Grand Prix.
The highest-rating television programs include sports telecasts such as the Summer Olympics, FIFA World Cup, The Ashes, Rugby League State of Origin, and the grand finals of the National Rugby League and Australian Football League.
[343] Skiing in Australia began in the 1860s and snow sports take place in the Australian Alps and parts of Tasmania.
Microsoft Corporation /ˈmaɪkrəˌsɒft, -roʊ-, -ˌsɔːft/[5][6] (commonly referred to as Microsoft) is an American multinational technology company headquartered in Redmond, Washington, that develops, manufactures, licenses, supports and sells computer software, consumer electronics and personal computers and services.
Its best known software products are the Microsoft Windows line of operating systems, Microsoft Office office suite, and Internet Explorer and Edge web browsers.
Its flagship hardware products are the Xbox game consoles and the Microsoft Surface tablet lineup.
It is the world's largest software maker by revenue,[7] and one of the world's most valuable companies.
[8]
Microsoft was founded by Paul Allen and Bill Gates on April 4, 1975, to develop and sell BASIC interpreters for Altair 8800.
It rose to dominate the personal computer operating system market with MS-DOS in the mid-1980s, followed by Microsoft Windows.
The company's 1986 initial public offering, and subsequent rise in its share price, created three billionaires and an estimated 12,000 millionaires among Microsoft employees.
Since the 1990s, it has increasingly diversified from the operating system market and has made a number of corporate acquisitions.
In May 2011, Microsoft acquired Skype Technologies for $8.
5 billion in its largest acquisition to date.
[9]
As of 2015, Microsoft is market dominant in both the IBM PC-compatible operating system (while it lost the majority of the overall operating system market to Android) and office software suite markets (the latter with Microsoft Office).
The company also produces a wide range of other software for desktops and servers, and is active in areas including Internet search (with Bing), the video game industry (with the Xbox, Xbox 360 and Xbox One consoles), the digital services market (through MSN), and mobile phones (via the operating systems of Nokia's former phones[10] and Windows Phone OS).
In June 2012, Microsoft entered the personal computer production market for the first time, with the launch of the Microsoft Surface, a line of tablet computers.
With the acquisition of Nokia's devices and services division to form Microsoft Mobile Oy, the company re-entered the smartphone hardware market, after its previous attempt, Microsoft Kin, which resulted from their acquisition of Danger Inc.
[11]
Microsoft is a portmanteau of the words microcomputer and software.[12]
1.1 1972–84: Founding and company beginnings
1.3 1995–2007: Internet and the 32-bit era
1.4 2007–11: Windows Vista, mobile, and Windows 7
1.5 2011–present: Rebranding, Windows 8, Surface and Nokia devices
2.1 Windows Division, Server and Tools, Online Services Division
2.3 Entertainment and Devices Division
Paul Allen (l.) and Bill Gates (r.) on October 19, 1981, in a sea of PCs after signing a pivotal contract.
IBM called Microsoft in July 1980 inquiring about programming languages for its upcoming PC line;[13]:228 after failed negotiations with another company, IBM gave Microsoft a contract to develop the OS for the new line of PCs.
[14]
Paul Allen and Bill Gates, childhood friends with a passion for computer programming, sought to make a successful business utilizing their shared skills.
In 1972 they founded their first company, named Traf-O-Data, which offered a rudimentary computer that tracked and analyzed automobile traffic data.
Allen went on to pursue a degree in computer science at Washington State University, later dropping out of school to work at Honeywell.
Gates began studies at Harvard.
[15] The January 1975 issue of Popular Electronics, which Allen bought at Out of Town News, featured Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems's (MITS) Altair 8800 microcomputer.
[16] Allen suggested that they could program a BASIC interpreter for the device; after a call from Gates claiming to have a working interpreter, MITS requested a demonstration.
Since they didn't actually have one, Allen worked on a simulator for the Altair while Gates developed the interpreter.
Although they developed the interpreter on a simulator and not the actual device, the interpreter worked flawlessly when they demonstrated the interpreter to MITS in Albuquerque, New Mexico in March 1975; MITS agreed to distribute it, marketing it as Altair BASIC.
[13]:108, 112–114 They officially established Microsoft on April 4, 1975, with Gates as the CEO.
[17] Allen came up with the original name of "Micro-Soft," as recounted in a 1995 Fortune magazine article.
[18][19] In August 1977 the company formed an agreement with ASCII Magazine in Japan, resulting in its first international office, "ASCII Microsoft".
[20] The company moved to a new home in Bellevue, Washington in January 1979.
Microsoft entered the OS business in 1980 with its own version of Unix, called Xenix.[21] However, it was MS-DOS that solidified the company's dominance.
After negotiations with Digital Research failed, IBM awarded a contract to Microsoft in November 1980 to provide a version of the CP/M OS, which was set to be used in the upcoming IBM Personal Computer (IBM PC).
[22] For this deal, Microsoft purchased a CP/M clone called 86-DOS from Seattle Computer Products, branding it as MS-DOS, which IBM rebranded to PC DOS.
Following the release of the IBM PC in August 1981, Microsoft retained ownership of MS-DOS.
Since IBM copyrighted the IBM PC BIOS, other companies had to reverse engineer it in order for non-IBM hardware to run as IBM PC compatibles, but no such restriction applied to the operating systems.
Due to various factors, such as MS-DOS's available software selection, Microsoft eventually became the leading PC operating systems vendor.
[14][23]:210 The company expanded into new markets with the release of the Microsoft Mouse in 1983, as well as with a publishing division named Microsoft Press.
[13]:232 Paul Allen resigned from Microsoft in 1983 after developing Hodgkin's disease.
Windows 1.0 was released on November 20, 1985 as the first version of the Microsoft Windows line.
While jointly developing a new OS with IBM in 1984, OS/2, Microsoft released Microsoft Windows, a graphical extension for MS-DOS, on November 20, 1985.
[13]:242–243, 246 Microsoft moved its headquarters to Redmond on February 26, 1986, and on March 13 the company went public;[24] the ensuing rise in the stock would make an estimated four billionaires and 12,000 millionaires from Microsoft employees.
[25] Due to the partnership with IBM, in 1990 the Federal Trade Commission set its eye on Microsoft for possible collusion; it marked the beginning of over a decade of legal clashes with the U.
S.
Government.
[26] Microsoft released its version of OS/2 to original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) on April 2, 1987;[13]:243–244 meanwhile, the company was at work on a 32-bit OS, Microsoft Windows NT, using ideas from OS/2; it shipped on July 21, 1993, with a new modular kernel and the Win32 application programming interface (API), making porting from 16-bit (MS-DOS-based) Windows easier.
Once Microsoft informed IBM of NT, the OS/2 partnership deteriorated.
In 1990, Microsoft introduced its office suite, Microsoft Office. The software bundled separate office productivity applications, such as Microsoft Word and Microsoft Excel.
[13]:301 On May 22 Microsoft launched Windows 3.
0 with a streamlined user interface graphics and improved protected mode capability for the Intel 386 processor.
[28] Both Office and Windows became dominant in their respective areas.
[29][30] Novell, a Word competitor from 1984–1986, filed a lawsuit years later claiming that Microsoft left part of its APIs undocumented in order to gain a competitive advantage.
[31]
On July 27, 1994, the U.S. Department of Justice, Antitrust Division filed a Competitive Impact Statement that said, in part: "Beginning in 1988, and continuing until July 15, 1994, Microsoft induced many OEMs to execute anti-competitive "per processor" licenses.
Under a per processor license, an OEM pays Microsoft a royalty for each computer it sells containing a particular microprocessor, whether the OEM sells the computer with a Microsoft operating system or a non-Microsoft operating system.
In effect, the royalty payment to Microsoft when no Microsoft product is being used acts as a penalty, or tax, on the OEM's use of a competing PC operating system.
Since 1988, Microsoft's use of per processor licenses has increased.
"[32]
Bill Gates giving his deposition in 1998 for the United States v. Microsoft trial.[26]
Following Bill Gates's internal "Internet Tidal Wave memo" on May 26, 1995, Microsoft began to redefine its offerings and expand its product line into computer networking and the World Wide Web.
[33] The company released Windows 95 on August 24, 1995, featuring pre-emptive multitasking, a completely new user interface with a novel start button, and 32-bit compatibility; similar to NT, it provided the Win32 API.
[34][35]:20 Windows 95 came bundled with the online service MSN (which was at first intended to be a competitor to the Internet), and for OEMs Internet Explorer, a web browser.
Internet Explorer was not bundled with the retail Windows 95 boxes because the boxes were printed before the team finished the web browser, and instead was included in the Windows 95 Plus! pack.
[36] Branching out into new markets in 1996, Microsoft and NBC Universal created a new 24/7 cable news station, MSNBC.
0, a new OS designed for devices with low memory and other constraints, such as personal digital assistants.
[38] In October 1997, the Justice Department filed a motion in the Federal District Court, stating that Microsoft violated an agreement signed in 1994 and asked the court to stop the bundling of Internet Explorer with Windows.
In 1996, Microsoft released Windows CE, a version of the operating system meant for personal digital assistants and other tiny computers.
Bill Gates handed over the CEO position on January 13, 2000, to Steve Ballmer, an old college friend of Gates and employee of the company since 1980, creating a new position for himself as Chief Software Architect.
[13]:111, 228[17] Various companies including Microsoft formed the Trusted Computing Platform Alliance in October 1999 to, among other things, increase security and protect intellectual property through identifying changes in hardware and software.
Critics decry the alliance as a way to enforce indiscriminate restrictions over how consumers use software, and over how computers behave, a form of digital rights management; for example the scenario where a computer is not only secured for its owner, but also secured against its owner as well.
[39][40] On April 3, 2000, a judgment was handed down in the case of United States v.
Microsoft,[41] calling the company an "abusive monopoly";[42] it settled with the U.
[24] On October 25, 2001, Microsoft released Windows XP, unifying the mainstream and NT lines under the NT codebase.
[43] The company released the Xbox later that year, entering the game console market dominated by Sony and Nintendo.
[44] In March 2004 the European Union brought antitrust legal action against the company, citing it abused its dominance with the Windows OS, resulting in a judgment of €497 million ($613 million) and to produce new versions of Windows XP without Windows Media Player, Windows XP Home Edition N and Windows XP Professional N.
2007–11: Windows Vista, mobile, and Windows 7
CEO Steve Ballmer at the MIX event in 2008. In an interview about his management style in 2005, he mentioned that his first priority was to get the people he delegates to in order.
Ballmer also emphasized the need to continue pursuing new technologies even if initial attempts fail, citing the original attempts with Windows as an example.
[47]
Released in January 2007, the next version of Windows, Windows Vista, focused on features, security, and a redesigned user interface dubbed Aero.
[48][49] Microsoft Office 2007, released at the same time, featured a "Ribbon" user interface which was a significant departure from its predecessors.
Relatively strong sales of both titles helped to produce a record profit in 2007.
[50] The European Union imposed another fine of €899 million ($1.
4 billion) for Microsoft's lack of compliance with the March 2004 judgment on February 27, 2008, saying that the company charged rivals unreasonable prices for key information about its workgroup and backoffice servers.
Microsoft stated that it was in compliance and that "these fines are about the past issues that have been resolved".
[51]
2007 also saw the creation of a multi-core unit at Microsoft, as they followed in the steps of server companies such as Sun and IBM.
[52]
Bill Gates retired from his role as Chief Software Architect on June 27, 2008, a decision announced in June 2006, while retaining other positions related to the company in addition to being an advisor for the company on key projects.
[53][54] Azure Services Platform, the company's entry into the cloud computing market for Windows, launched on October 27, 2008.
[55] On February 12, 2009, Microsoft announced its intent to open a chain of Microsoft-branded retail stores, and on October 22, 2009, the first retail Microsoft Store opened in Scottsdale, Arizona; the same day the first store opened, Windows 7 was officially released to the public.
Windows 7's focus was on refining Vista with ease of use features and performance enhancements, rather than a large reworking of Windows.
[56][57][58]
As the smartphone industry boomed beginning in 2007, Microsoft struggled to keep up with its rivals Apple and Google in providing a modern smartphone operating system.
As a result, in 2010, Microsoft revamped their aging flagship mobile operating system, Windows Mobile, replacing it with the new Windows Phone OS; along with a new strategy in the smartphone industry that has Microsoft working more closely with smartphone manufacturers, such as Nokia, and to provide a consistent user experience across all smartphones using Microsoft's Windows Phone OS.
It used a new user interface design language, codenamed "Metro", which prominently used simple shapes, typography and iconography, and the concept of minimalism.
Microsoft is a founding member of the Open Networking Foundation started on March 23, 2011. Other founding companies include Google, HP Networking, Yahoo, Verizon, Deutsche Telekom and 17 other companies.
The nonprofit organization is focused on providing support for a new cloud computing initiative called Software-Defined Networking.
[59] The initiative is meant to speed innovation through simple software changes in telecommunications networks, wireless networks, data centers and other networking areas.
[60]
2011–present: Rebranding, Windows 8, Surface and Nokia devices
Surface Pro 3, part of the Surface series of laplets by Microsoft
Following the release of Windows Phone, Microsoft underwent a gradual rebranding of its product range throughout 2011 and 2012—the corporation's logos, products, services, and websites adopted the principles and concepts of the Metro design language.
[61] Microsoft previewed Windows 8, an operating system designed to power both personal computers and tablet computers, in Taipei in June 2011.
[62] A developer preview was released on September 13, and was replaced by a consumer preview on February 29, 2012.
[63] On May 31, 2012, the preview version was released.
On June 18, 2012, Microsoft unveiled the Surface, the first computer in the company's history to have its hardware made by Microsoft.
[64][65] On June 25, Microsoft paid US $1.
2 billion to buy the social network Yammer.
[66] On July 31, 2012, Microsoft launched the Outlook.
com webmail service to compete with Gmail.
[67] On September 4, 2012, Microsoft released Windows Server 2012.
[68]
In July 2012, Microsoft sold its 50% stake in MSNBC.com, which it had run as a joint venture with NBC since 1996.
[69] On October 1, Microsoft announced its intention to launch a news operation, part of a new-look MSN, at the time of the Windows 8 launch that was later in the month.
[70] On October 26, 2012, Microsoft launched Windows 8 and the Microsoft Surface.
[65][71] Three days later, Windows Phone 8 was launched.
[72] To cope with the potential for an increase in demand for products and services, Microsoft opened a number of "holiday stores" across the U.
S.
to complement the increasing number of "bricks-and-mortar" Microsoft Stores that opened in 2012.
[73]
On March 29, 2013, Microsoft launched a Patent Tracker.[74] The Kinect, the motion sensing input devices by Microsoft, which was first introduced in November 2010 was upgraded for the 2013 release of the eighth-generation Xbox One.
Its capabilities were revealed in May 2013.
The new Kinect uses an ultra-wide 1080p camera, it can function in the dark due to an infrared sensor, it employs higher-end processing power and new software, it can distinguish between fine movements (such as a thumb movements), and the device can determine a user's heart rate by looking at his/her face.
[75] Microsoft filed a patent application in 2011 that suggests that the corporation may use the Kinect camera system to monitor the behavior of television viewers as part of a plan to make the viewing experience more active.
On July 19, 2013, Microsoft stocks suffered its biggest one-day percentage sell-off since the year 2000 after its fourth-quarter report raised concerns among the investors on the poor showings of both Windows 8 and the Surface tablet; with more than 11 percentage points declining Microsoft suffered a loss of more than US$32 billion.
[76] For the 2010 fiscal year, Microsoft had five product divisions: Windows Division, Server and Tools, Online Services Division, Microsoft Business Division, and Entertainment and Devices Division.
John W. Thompson has been appointed the chairman of Microsoft, taking over from Bill Gates.
On September 3, 2013, Microsoft agreed to buy Nokia's mobile unit for $7 billion.[77] Also in 2013, Amy Hood became the CFO of Microsoft.
[78]
The Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI) was launched in October 2013 and Microsoft is part of the coalition of public and private organizations that also includes Facebook, Intel and Google.
Led by Tim Berners-Lee, the A4AI seeks to make Internet access more affordable so that access is broadened in the developing world, where only 31% of people are online.
Google will help to decrease internet access prices so that they fall below the UN Broadband Commission's worldwide target of 5% of monthly income.
[79]
In line with the maturing PC business, in July 2013, Microsoft announced that it would reorganize the business into four new business divisions by function: Operating System, Apps, Cloud and Devices.
All previous divisions will be diluted into new divisions without any workforce cut.
[80]
On February 4, 2014, Steve Ballmer stepped down as CEO of Microsoft and was succeeded by Satya Nadella, who previously led Microsoft's Cloud and Enterprise division.
[81] On the same day, John W.
Thompson took on the role of chairman, with Bill Gates stepping down from the position to become more active within the company as Technology Advisor.
[82]
On April 25, 2014, Microsoft acquired Nokia Devices and Services and formed a new subsidiary, Microsoft Mobile Oy.
On September 15, 2014, Microsoft acquired the video game development company Mojang for $2.5 billion, best known for its wildly popular flagship game Minecraft.
[83]
On January 21, 2015, Microsoft announced the release of their first Interactive whiteboard, The Surface Hub.
[84] (Part of the Surface family)
In Q1 2015, Microsoft is the third largest maker of mobile phones selling 33 million units (7.2% of all), while a large majority (at least 75%) of them do not run any version of Windows Phone – those other phones are not categorized as smartphones by Gartner – in the same time frame 8 million Windows smartphones (2.
5% of all smartphones) where made by all manufacturers (but mostly by Microsoft).
[10]
On March 1, 2016, Microsoft announced the merger of its PC and Xbox divisions, with Phil Spencer announcing that Universal Windows Applications would be the focus for Microsoft's gaming in the future.
[85]
Windows Division, Server and Tools, Online Services Division
The company's Client division produces the flagship Windows OS line such as Windows 8; it also produces the Windows Live family of products and services.
Server and Tools produces the server versions of Windows, such as Windows Server 2008 R2 as well as a set of development tools called Microsoft Visual Studio, Microsoft Silverlight, a web application framework, and System Center Configuration Manager, a collection of tools providing remote-control abilities, patch management, software distribution and a hardware/software inventory.
Other server products include: Microsoft SQL Server, a relational database management system, Microsoft Exchange Server, for certain business-oriented e-mail and scheduling features, Small Business Server, for messaging and other small business-oriented features; and Microsoft BizTalk Server, for business process management.
Microsoft provides IT consulting ("Microsoft Consulting Services") and produces a set of certification programs handled by the Server and Tools division designed to recognize individuals who have a minimal set of proficiencies in a specific role; this includes developers ("Microsoft Certified Solution Developer"), system/network analysts ("Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer"), trainers ("Microsoft Certified Trainers") and administrators ("Microsoft Certified Systems Administrator" and "Microsoft Certified Database Administrator").
Microsoft Press, which publishes books, is also managed by the division.
The Online Services Business division handles the online service MSN and the search engine Bing.
Microsoft Talo, the headquarters of Microsoft Mobile
The Microsoft Business Division produces Microsoft Office including Microsoft Office 2010, the company's line of office software.
The software product includes Word (a word processor), Access (a relational database program), Excel (a spreadsheet program), Outlook (Groupware, frequently used with Exchange Server), PowerPoint (presentation software), Publisher (desktop publishing software) and Sharepoint.
A number of other products were added later with the release of Office 2003 including Visio, Project, MapPoint, InfoPath and OneNote.
The division also develops enterprise resource planning (ERP) software for companies under the Microsoft Dynamics brand.
These include: Microsoft Dynamics AX, Microsoft Dynamics NAV, Microsoft Dynamics GP, and Microsoft Dynamics SL.
They are targeted at varying company types and countries, and limited to organizations with under 7,500 employees.
[86] Also included under the Dynamics brand is the customer relationship management software Microsoft Dynamics CRM, part of the Azure Services Platform.
The Entertainment and Devices Division produces the Windows CE OS for embedded systems and Windows Phone for smartphones.
[87] Microsoft initially entered the mobile market through Windows CE for handheld devices, eventually developing into the Windows Mobile OS and now, Windows Phone.
Windows CE is designed for devices where the OS may not directly be visible to the end user, in particular, appliances and cars.
The division also produces computer games, via its in-house game publisher Microsoft Studios, that run on Windows PCs and other systems including titles such as Age of Empires, Halo and the Microsoft Flight Simulator series, and houses the Macintosh Business Unit which produces Mac OS software including Microsoft Office 2011 for Mac.
Microsoft's Entertainment and Devices Division designs, markets, and manufactures consumer electronics including the Xbox 360 game console, the handheld Zune media player, and the television-based Internet appliance MSN TV.
Microsoft also markets personal computer hardware including mice, keyboards, and various game controllers such as joysticks and gamepads.
Future Decoded is an event held every year by Microsoft that allows business partners of the company sharing their views on what the future holds for business, society, leadership, technology and more.
The company is run by a board of directors made up of mostly company outsiders, as is customary for publicly traded companies.
Members of the board of directors as of January 2016 are John W.
Thompson, Bill Gates, Teri L.
List-Stoll, Mason Morfit, Satya Nadella, Charles Noski, Helmut Panke, Sandi Peterson, Charles W.
Scharf, John W.
Stanton, and Padmasree Warrior.
[88] Board members are elected every year at the annual shareholders' meeting using a majority vote system.
There are five committees within the board which oversee more specific matters.
These committees include the Audit Committee, which handles accounting issues with the company including auditing and reporting; the Compensation Committee, which approves compensation for the CEO and other employees of the company; the Finance Committee, which handles financial matters such as proposing mergers and acquisitions; the Governance and Nominating Committee, which handles various corporate matters including nomination of the board; and the Antitrust Compliance Committee, which attempts to prevent company practices from violating antitrust laws.
Five year history graph of NASDAQ: MSFT stock on July 17, 2013[90]
When Microsoft went public and launched its initial public offering (IPO) in 1986, the opening stock price was $21; after the trading day, the price closed at $27.
75.
As of July 2010, with the company's nine stock splits, any IPO shares would be multiplied by 288; if one was to buy the IPO today given the splits and other factors, it would cost about 9 cents.
[13]:235–236[91][92] The stock price peaked in 1999 at around $119 ($60.
928 adjusting for splits).
[93] The company began to offer a dividend on January 16, 2003, starting at eight cents per share for the fiscal year followed by a dividend of sixteen cents per share the subsequent year, switching from yearly to quarterly dividends in 2005 with eight cents a share per quarter and a special one-time payout of three dollars per share for the second quarter of the fiscal year.
[93][94] Though the company had subsequent increases in dividend payouts, the price of Microsoft's stock remained steady for years.
Standard and Poor's and Moody's have both given a AAA rating to Microsoft, whose assets were valued at $41 billion as compared to only $8.
5 billion in unsecured debt.
Consequently, in February 2011 Microsoft released a corporate bond amounting to $2.
25 billion with relatively low borrowing rates compared to government bonds.
[96]
For the first time in 20 years Apple Inc. surpassed Microsoft in Q1 2011 quarterly profits and revenues due to a slowdown in PC sales and continuing huge losses in Microsoft's Online Services Division (which contains its search engine Bing).
Microsoft profits were $5.
2 billion, while Apple Inc.
profits were $6 billion, on revenues of $14.
5 billion and $24.
7 billion respectively.
[97]
Microsoft's Online Services Division has been continuously loss-making since 2006 and in Q1 2011 it lost $726 million.
This follows a loss of $2.
5 billion for the year 2010.
[98]
On July 20, 2012, Microsoft posted its first quarterly loss ever, despite earning record revenues for the quarter and fiscal year, with a net loss of $492 million due to a writedown related to the advertising company aQuantive, which had been acquired for $6.
2 billion back in 2007.
[99]
As of January 2014, Microsoft's market capitalization stood at $314B,[100] making it the 8th largest company in the world by market capitalization.
[101]
On November 14, 2014, Microsoft overtook Exxon Mobil to become the 2nd most valuable company by market capitalization, behind only Apple Inc.
Its total market value was over $410B — with the stock price hitting $50.
04 a share, the highest since early 2000.
[102]
In 2015, Reuters reported that Microsoft Corp had earnings abroad of $76.4 billion which were untaxed by the IRS.
Under U.
S.
law corporations don't pay income tax on overseas profits until the profits are brought into the United States[103]
Windows 8 Launch Event in Akihabara, Tokyo on 25 October 2012
In 2004, Microsoft commissioned research firms to do independent studies comparing the total cost of ownership (TCO) of Windows Server 2003 to Linux; the firms concluded that companies found Windows easier to administrate than Linux, thus those using Windows would administrate faster resulting in lower costs for their company (i.
e.
lower TCO).
[104] This spurred a wave of related studies; a study by the Yankee Group concluded that upgrading from one version of Windows Server to another costs a fraction of the switching costs from Windows Server to Linux, although companies surveyed noted the increased security and reliability of Linux servers and concern about being locked into using Microsoft products.
[105] Another study, released by the Open Source Development Labs, claimed that the Microsoft studies were "simply outdated and one-sided" and their survey concluded that the TCO of Linux was lower due to Linux administrators managing more servers on average and other reasons.
As part of the "Get the Facts" campaign, Microsoft highlighted the .NET trading platform that it had developed in partnership with Accenture for the London Stock Exchange, claiming that it provided "five nines" reliability.
After suffering extended downtime and unreliability[107][108] the LSE announced in 2009 that it was planning to drop its Microsoft solution and switch to a Linux-based one in 2010.
[109][110]
In 2012, Microsoft hired a political pollster named Mark Penn, whom the New York Times called "famous for bulldozing" his political opponents[111] as Executive Vice-President, Advertising and Strategy.
Penn created a series of negative ads targeting one of Microsoft's chief competitors, Google.
The ads, called "Scroogled", attempt to make the case that Google is "screwing" consumers with search results rigged to favor Google's paid advertisers, that Gmail violates the privacy of its users to place ad results related to the content of their emails and shopping results which favor Google products.
Tech publications like Tech Crunch have been highly critical of the ad campaign,[112] while Google employees have embraced it.
[113]
In July 2014, Microsoft announced plans to lay off 18,000 employees. Microsoft employed 127,104 people as of June 5, 2014, making this about a 14 percent reduction of its workforce as the biggest Microsoft lay off ever.
It will include 12,500 professional and factory personnel.
Previously, Microsoft has laid off 5,800 jobs in 2009 in line with US financial crisis.
[114][115]
In September 2014, Microsoft laid off 2,100 people, including 747 people in the Seattle-Redmond area, where the company is headquartered.
The firings came as a second wave of the layoffs that were previously announced.
This brings the total number to over 15,000 out of the 18,000 expected cuts.
[116]
In October 2014, Microsoft revealed that it was almost done with the elimination of 18,000 employees which is its largest ever layoff sweep.
[117]
In July 2015, Microsoft announced another 7,800 job cuts in next several months.[3]
Microsoft provides information about reported bugs in their software to intelligence agencies of the United States government, prior to the public release of the fix.
A Microsoft spokesperson has stated that the corporation runs several programs that facilitate the sharing of such information with the U.
S.
government.
[118]
Following media reports about PRISM, NSA's massive electronic surveillance program, in May 2013, several technology companies were identified as participants, including Microsoft.
[119] According to leaks of said program, Microsoft joined the PRISM program in 2007.
[120] However, in June 2013, an official statement from Microsoft flatly denied their participation in the program:
We provide customer data only when we receive a legally binding order or subpoena to do so, and never on a voluntary basis.
In addition we only ever comply with orders for requests about specific accounts or identifiers.
If the government has a broader voluntary national security program to gather customer data, we don't participate in it.
[121]
During the first six months in 2013, Microsoft had received requests that affected between 15,000 and 15,999 accounts.
[122] In December 2013, the company made statement to further emphasis the fact that they take their customers' privacy and data protection very seriously, even saying that "government snooping potentially now constitutes an "advanced persistent threat," alongside sophisticated malware and cyber attacks".
[123] The statement also marked the beginning of three-part program to enhance Microsoft's encryption and transparency efforts.
On July 1, 2014, as part of this program they opened the first (of many) Microsoft Transparency Center, that provides "participating governments with the ability to review source code for our key products, assure themselves of their software integrity, and confirm there are no "back doors.
Microsoft has also argued that the United States Congress should enact strong privacy regulations to protect consumer data.
[125]
The Commons, located on the campus of the company's headquarters in Redmond
Technical reference for developers and articles for various Microsoft magazines such as Microsoft Systems Journal (MSJ) are available through the Microsoft Developer Network (MSDN).
MSDN also offers subscriptions for companies and individuals, and the more expensive subscriptions usually offer access to pre-release beta versions of Microsoft software.
[126][127] In April 2004 Microsoft launched a community site for developers and users, titled Channel 9, that provides a wiki and an Internet forum.
[128] Another community site that provides daily videocasts and other services, On10.
net, launched on March 3, 2006.
[129] Free technical support is traditionally provided through online Usenet newsgroups, and CompuServe in the past, monitored by Microsoft employees; there can be several newsgroups for a single product.
Helpful people can be elected by peers or Microsoft employees for Microsoft Most Valuable Professional (MVP) status, which entitles them to a sort of special social status and possibilities for awards and other benefits.
Noted for its internal lexicon, the expression "eating our own dog food" is used to describe the policy of using pre-release and beta versions of products inside Microsoft in an effort to test them in "real-world" situations.
[131] This is usually shortened to just "dog food" and is used as noun, verb, and adjective.
Another bit of jargon, FYIFV or FYIV ("Fuck You, I'm [Fully] Vested"), is used by an employee to indicate they are financially independent and can avoid work anytime they wish.
[132] The company is also known for its hiring process, mimicked in other organizations and dubbed the "Microsoft interview", which is notorious for off-the-wall questions such as "Why is a manhole cover round?".
[133]
Microsoft is an outspoken opponent of the cap on H1B visas, which allow companies in the U.S. to employ certain foreign workers.
Bill Gates claims the cap on H1B visas makes it difficult to hire employees for the company, stating "I'd certainly get rid of the H1B cap" in 2005.
[134] Critics of H1B visas argue that relaxing the limits would result in increased unemployment for U.
S.
citizens due to H1B workers working for lower salaries.
[135] The Human Rights Campaign Corporate Equality Index, a report of how progressive the organization deems company policies towards LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual and transsexual) employees, rated Microsoft as 87% from 2002 to 2004 and as 100% from 2005 to 2010 after they allowed gender expression.
[136]
In 2011, Greenpeace released a report rating the top ten big brands in cloud computing on their sources of electricity for their data centers.
At the time, data centers consumed up to 2% of all global electricity and this amount was projected to increase.
Phil Radford of Greenpeace said "we are concerned that this new explosion in electricity use could lock us into old, polluting energy sources instead of the clean energy available today,"[137] and called on "Amazon, Microsoft and other leaders of the information-technology industry must embrace clean energy to power their cloud-based data centers.
"[138] In 2013, Microsoft agreed to buy power generated by a Texas wind project to power one of its data centers.
[139]
Microsoft is ranked on the 17th place in Greenpeace's Guide to Greener Electronics (16th Edition) that ranks 18 electronics manufacturers according to their policies on toxic chemicals, recycling and climate change.
[140] Microsoft's timeline for phasing out BFRs and phthalates in all products is 2012 but its commitment to phasing out PVC is not clear.
As yet (January 2011) it has no products that are completely free from PVC and BFRs.
[141]
Microsoft's main U.S. campus received a silver certification from the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program in 2008, and it installed over 2,000 solar panels on top of its buildings in its Silicon Valley campus, generating approximately 15 percent of the total energy needed by the facilities in April 2005.
[142]
Microsoft makes use of alternative forms of transit. It created one of the world's largest private bus systems, the "Connector", to transport people from outside the company; for on-campus transportation, the "Shuttle Connect" uses a large fleet of hybrid cars to save fuel.
The company also subsidises regional public transport, provided by Sound Transit and King County Metro, as an incentive.
[142][143] In February 2010 however, Microsoft took a stance against adding additional public transport and high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes to the State Route 520 and its floating bridge connecting Redmond to Seattle; the company did not want to delay the construction any further.
[144]
Microsoft was ranked number 1 in the list of the World's Best Multinational Workplaces by the Great Place to Work Institute in 2011.
[145]
The corporate headquarters, informally known as the Microsoft Redmond Campus, is located at One Microsoft Way in Redmond, Washington.
Microsoft initially moved onto the grounds of the campus on February 26, 1986, weeks before the company went public on March 13.
The headquarters has since experienced multiple expansions since its establishment.
It is estimated to encompass over 8 million ft2 (750,000 m2) of office space and 30,000-40,000 employees.
[146] Additional offices are located in Bellevue and Issaquah (90,000 employees world-wide).
The company is planning to upgrade its Mountain View, CA campus on a grand scale. The company has occupied this campus since 1981.
The company is planning to buy the 32-acre campus.
[147] The plans submitted involve expanding the campus by 25%.
It is expected that it will take three years to complete the expansion.
If approved, construction will start in early 2017.
[147]
On 26 October 2015, the company opened its flagship retail location on Fifth Avenue in New York City.
The location features a five-story glass storefront and is 22,270 square feet.
[148] As per company executives, Microsoft had been on the lookout for a flagship location since 2009.
[149] The company’s retail locations are part of a greater strategy to help build a connection with its consumers.
The opening of the store coincided with the launch of the Surface Book and Surface Pro 4.
[150] Notably, the second floor has a large area designated for consumers to play Xbox games.
The third floor has been named the “Dell Experience at the Microsoft Store,” which showcases various Dell products.
The fourth floor is for employees and administrative operations.
The fifth floor has been designed as a pseudo-conference center, as it will hold events and meetings.
On 12 November 2015, Microsoft opened a second flagship store, located in Sydney’s Pitt Street Mall.[151] The two-storey, 6000 sq ft location features Microsoft's flagship products including the Surface line and Xbox One, there is also an Answer Desk on site for customers to get product support.
[152]
Microsoft adopted the so-called "Pac-Man Logo", designed by Scott Baker, in 1987. Baker stated "The new logo, in Helvetica italic typeface, has a slash between the o and s to emphasize the "soft" part of the name and convey motion and speed.
"[153] Dave Norris ran an internal joke campaign to save the old logo, which was green, in all uppercase, and featured a fanciful letter O, nicknamed the blibbet, but it was discarded.
[154] Microsoft's logo with the "Your potential.
Our passion.
" tagline below the main corporate name, is based on a slogan Microsoft used in 2008.
In 2002, the company started using the logo in the United States and eventually started a TV campaign with the slogan, changed from the previous tagline of "Where do you want to go today?".
[155][156][157] During the private MGX (Microsoft Global Exchange) conference in 2010, Microsoft unveiled the company's next tagline, "Be What's Next.
[158] They also had a slogan/tagline "Making it all make sense.
On August 23, 2012, Microsoft unveiled a new corporate logo at the opening of its 23rd Microsoft store in Boston indicating the company's shift of focus from the classic style to the tile-centric modern interface which it uses/will use on the Windows Phone platform, Xbox 360, Windows 8 and the upcoming Office Suites.
[160] The new logo also includes four squares with the colors of the then-current Windows logo which have been used to represent Microsoft's four major products: Windows (blue), Office (red), Xbox (green), and Bing (yellow).
[161] The logo resembles the opening of one of the commercials for Windows 95.
[162][163]
The Iraq War[nb 1] was a protracted armed conflict that began with the 2003 invasion of Iraq by a United States-led coalition.
The invasion regime toppled the government of Saddam Hussein.
However, the conflict continued for much of the next decade as an insurgency emerged to oppose the occupying forces and the post-invasion Iraqi government.
[51] An estimated 151,000 to 600,000 or more Iraqis were killed in the first 3–4 years of conflict.
The United States officially withdrew from the country in 2011 but became re-involved in 2014 at the head of a new coalition; the insurgency and many dimensions of the civil armed conflict continue.
The invasion began on 20 March 2003, with the U.S., joined by the United Kingdom and several coalition allies, launching a "shock and awe" bombing campaign.
Iraqi forces were quickly overwhelmed as U.
S.
forces swept through the country.
The invasion led to the collapse of the Ba'athist government; Saddam was captured on December 2003 in Operation Red Dawn and executed by a military court three years later.
However, the power vacuum following Saddam's demise and the mismanagement of the occupation led to widespread sectarian violence between Shias and Sunnis as well as a lengthy insurgency against U.
S.
and coalition forces.
The United States responded with a troop surge in 2007 to attempt to reduce the violence.
The U.
S.
began withdrawing its troops in the winter of 2007–08.
The winding down of U.
involvement in Iraq accelerated under President Barack Obama.
formally withdrew all combat troops from Iraq by December 2011.
The Bush administration based its rationale for war principally on the assertion that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and that Saddam's government posed an immediate threat to the United States and its coalition allies.
[53][54] Select U.
S.
officials accused Saddam of harboring and supporting al-Qaeda,[55] while others cited the desire to end a repressive dictatorship and bring democracy to the people of Iraq.
[56][57] After the invasion, no substantial evidence was found to verify the initial claims about WMDs.
The rationale and misrepresentation of pre-war intelligence faced heavy criticism within the U.
S.
and internationally.
As a result of the war, Iraq held multi-party elections in 2005. Nouri al-Maliki became Prime Minister in 2006 and remained in office until 2014.
The al-Maliki government enacted policies that were widely seen as having the effect of alienating the country's Sunni minority and worsening sectarian tensions.
In the summer of 2014, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) launched a military offensive in Northern Iraq and declared a worldwide Islamic caliphate, eliciting another military response from the United States and its allies.
The Iraq War caused hundreds of thousands of civilian, and thousands of military casualties (see estimates below).
The majority of casualties occurred as a result of the insurgency and civil conflicts between 2004 and 2007.
1.1 Source of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
1.2 Iraq disarmament and pre-war intelligence
  1.2.1 U.N. weapons inspections resume
  1.3.4 Post-invasion views on WMD
3.1 2003: Beginnings of insurgency
  3.1.1 Coalition Provisional Authority and the Iraq Survey Group
  3.1.2 Capturing former government leaders
3.3 2005: Elections and transitional government
3.4 2006: Civil war and permanent Iraqi government
  3.4.1 Iraq Study Group report and Saddam's execution
  3.5.1 Planned troop reduction
  3.5.2 Effects of the surge on security
  3.5.6 Blackwater private security controversy
  3.6.1 Spring offensives on Shiite militias
  3.6.2 Congressional testimony
  3.6.3 Iraqi security forces rearm
  3.6.4 Status of forces agreement
  3.7.3 Exit strategy announcement
  3.7.4 Sixth anniversary protests
  3.7.5 Coalition forces withdraw
  3.7.6 Iraq awards oil contracts
3.8 2010: U.S. drawdown and Operation New Dawn
  3.8.1 Iraqi security forces transition towards self-reliance
  3.8.2 UN lifts restrictions on Iraq
8.2 Coalition forces and private contractors
10 Relation to the Global War on Terrorism
11.1 Role of Saudi Arabia and non-Iraqis
Source of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
A 1990 Frontline report on “The arming of Iraq” said, “Officially, most Western nations participated in a total arms embargo against Iraq during the 1980s, but .
.
.
Western companies, primarily in Germany and Great Britain, but also in the United States, sold Iraq the key technology for its chemical, missile, and nuclear programs.
.
.
.
[M]any Western governments seemed remarkably indifferent, if not enthusiastic, about those deals.
.
.
.
[I]n Washington, the government consistently followed a policy which allowed and perhaps encouraged the extraordinary growth of Saddam Hussein's arsenal and his power.
”[58]
Iraq disarmament and pre-war intelligence
Prior to September 2002, the CIA was the Bush administration's main provider of intelligence on Iraq.
In September, a Pentagon unit called the Office of Special Plans (OSP) was created by Paul Wolfowitz and Douglas Feith, and headed by Feith, as charged by then-United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, to supply senior George W.
Bush administration officials with raw intelligence pertaining to Iraq.
[59] Seymour Hersh writes that, according to a Pentagon adviser, "[OSP] was created in order to find evidence of what Wolfowitz and his boss, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, wanted to be true—that Saddam Hussein had close ties to Al Qaeda, and that Iraq had an enormous arsenal of chemical, biological, and possibly even nuclear weapons (WMD) that threatened the region and, potentially, the United States.
] 'The agency [CIA] was out to disprove linkage between Iraq and terrorism,' the Pentagon adviser told me.
The issue of Iraq's disarmament reached a turning point in 2002–03, when President Bush demanded a complete end to alleged Iraqi production of weapons of mass destruction and full compliance with U.
N.
Security Council Resolutions requiring U.
N.
weapons inspectors unfettered access to suspected weapons production facilities.
The U.
N.
had prohibited Iraq from developing or possessing such weapons after the Persian Gulf War and required Iraq to permit inspections confirming compliance.
During inspections in 1999, U.
S.
intelligence agents supplied the United States with a direct feed of conversations between Iraqi security agencies as well as other information.
This was confirmed by The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal.
[61]
During 2002, U.S. President George Bush repeatedly warned of military action against Iraq unless inspections were allowed to progress unfettered.
In accordance with U.
N.
Security Council Resolution 1441 Iraq agreed to new inspections in late 2002.
With the cooperation of the Iraqis, a third weapons inspection team in 2003 led by David Kelly viewed and photographed two alleged mobile weapons laboratories, which were actually facilities for the production of hydrogen gas to fill balloons.
[62]
As part of its weapons inspection obligations, Iraq was required to supply a full declaration of its current weapons capabilities and manufacturing.
On 3 November 2002, Iraq supplied an 11,800-page report to the UN Security Council and the IAEA, stating that it had no WMDs.
Copies of the report were also unofficially supplied to several European journalists.
Colombia, chair of the Security Council, allowed U.
S.
officials to secretly remove 8,000 pages from the report before it was viewed by the full security council, and on the basis of this the report was declared incomplete and Iraq in breach of its obligations.
The removed pages contained details of U.
S.
and European companies and government agencies who had historically assisted Iraq in developing its chemical and biological weapons capabilities.
Shortly before the invasion, Hans Blix, the lead weapons inspector, advised the U.N. Security Council that Iraq was cooperating with inspections and the confirmation of disarmament through inspections could be achieved quickly if Iraq remained cooperative.
[64]
A UN weapons inspector examines an Iraqi factory in 2002.
In 1990, before the Persian Gulf War, Iraq had stockpiled 550 short tons (500 t) of yellowcake uranium at the Tuwaitha nuclear complex about 20 kilometres (12 mi) south of Baghdad.
[65] In late February 2002, the CIA sent former Ambassador Joseph C.
Wilson to investigate reports (later found to be forgeries) that Iraq was attempting to purchase additional yellowcake from Niger.
Wilson returned and informed the CIA that reports of yellowcake sales to Iraq were "unequivocally wrong.
"[66] The Bush administration, however, continued to allege Iraq's attempts to obtain additional yellowcake were a justification for military action, most prominently in the January 2003, State of the Union address, in which President Bush declared that Iraq had sought uranium, citing British intelligence sources.
[67]
In response, Wilson wrote a critical New York Times op-ed piece in June 2003 stating that he had personally investigated claims of yellowcake purchases and believed them to be fraudulent.
[68] After Wilson's op-ed, Wilson's wife Valerie Plame was publicly identified as an undercover CIA analyst by the columnist Robert Novak.
This led to a Justice Department investigation into the source of the leak.
The federal investigation led to the conviction of I.
Lewis (Scooter) Libby, Vice President Dick Cheney's chief of staff, on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice.
[65]
On 1 May 2005, the "Downing Street memo" was published in The Sunday Times. It contained an overview of a secret 23 July 2002 meeting among British government, Ministry of Defence, and British intelligence figures who discussed the build-up to the Iraq war—including direct references to classified U.
S.
policy of the time.
The memo stated that "Bush wanted to remove Saddam, through military action, justified by the conjunction of terrorism and WMD.
But the intelligence and facts were being fixed around the policy".
[69]
In September 2002, the Bush administration, the CIA and the DIA (Defense Intelligence Agency) said attempts by Iraq to acquire high-strength aluminum tubes that were prohibited under the UN monitoring program and which they said pointed to a clandestine effort to make centrifuges to enrich uranium for nuclear bombs.
[70] This analysis was opposed by the United States Department of Energy (DOE) and INR, which was significant because of DOE's expertise in such gas centrifuges and nuclear weapons programs.
The DOE and INR argued that the Iraqi tubes were poorly suited for centrifuges and that while it was technically possible with additional modification, conventional military uses were more plausible.
[71] A report released by the Institute for Science and International Security in 2002 reported that it was highly unlikely that the tubes could be used to enrich uranium.
An effort by the DOE to correct this detail in comments prepared for United States Secretary of State Colin Powell's UN appearance was rebuffed by the administration[72][73] and Powell, in his address to the UN Security Council just before the war, referenced the aluminum tubes, stating that while experts disagreed on whether or not the tubes were destined for a centrifuge program, the specifications of the tubes were unusually tight.
[74] Powell later admitted he had presented what turned out to be an inaccurate case to the UN on Iraqi weapons, and the intelligence he was relying on was, in some cases, "deliberately misleading.
"[75][76][77] After the 2008 U.
S.
presidential election, and the election of Democratic party nominee Barack Obama, President Bush stated that "[my] biggest regret of all the presidency has to have been the intelligence failure in Iraq".
The CIA had contacted Iraq's foreign minister, Naji Sabri, who was being paid by the French as an agent.
Sabri informed them that Saddam had hidden poison gas among Sunni tribesmen, had ambitions for a nuclear program but that it was not active, and that no biological weapons were being produced or stockpiled, although research was underway.
[79] According to Sidney Blumenthal, George Tenet briefed Bush on 18 September 2002, that Sabri had informed them that Iraq did not have WMD.
On 21 June 2006, the U.S. House of Representatives Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence released key points from a classified report from the National Ground Intelligence Center on the recovery of a small number of degraded chemical munitions in Iraq.
The report stated, "Coalition forces have recovered approximately 500 weapons munitions which contain potentially lethal mustard and pure sarin nerve agent.
" However, all are thought to be pre-1991 Gulf War munitions.
[80] According to the commander of the National Ground Intelligence Center "These are chemical weapons as defined under the Chemical Weapons Convention, and yes .
.
.
they do constitute weapons of mass destruction,".
In 2006, 2,400 nerve-agent rockets were found in a single compound.
[81]
In October 2014, the New York Times reported that U.S. servicemen had been exposed and injured during the disposal and destruction of abandoned 4,990 chemical weapons that had been discovered in Iraq.
[82] CBS News reported that the U.
S.
government had concealed the injuries to the troops by chemical weapons.
[83][84] US soldiers reporting exposure to mustard gas and sarin allege they were required to keep their exposure secret, sometimes declined admission to hospital and evacuation home despite the request of their commanders.
[84] "We were absolutely told not to talk about it" by a colonel, the former sergeant said.
[84]
In November 2014, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons reported the recovery and destruction of 4,530 aging chemical weapons by American forces.
[85]
In February 2015, The New York Times revealed that following the recovery of 17 Borak in 2004 and early 2005, the United States began acquiring and destroying Borak rockets.
The "extraordinary arms purchase plan", known as Operation Avarice, continued into 2006 and led to the destroying of more than 400 Borak rockets filled with sarin.
The sarin was of a higher purity level than that produced in Iraq in the 1980s.
[86]
Based on reports obtained by the German intelligence service from an Iraqi defector codenamed "Curveball", Colin Powell presented evidence to the United Nations security council that Iraq had an active biological weapons programs.
On 15 February 2011, the defector—a scientist identified as Rafid Ahmed Alwan al-Janabi—admitted to journalists working for The Guardian newspaper that he lied to the Bundesnachrichtendienst in order to strengthen the case against Saddam Hussein, whom he wished to see removed from power.
[87]
In December 2009, the former British prime minister, Tony Blair, stated that he "would still have thought it right to remove [Saddam Hussein]" regardless of whether Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction or not.
[88]
President George Bush, surrounded by leaders of the House and Senate, announces the Joint Resolution to Authorize the Use of United States Armed Forces Against Iraq, 2 October 2002.
Excerpt from Donald Rumsfeld memo dated 27 November 2001[89]
In the days immediately following 9/11, the Bush Administration national security team actively debated an invasion of Iraq.
A memo written by Sec.
Rumsfeld dated 27 November 2001 considers a U.
S.
–Iraq war.
One section of the memo questions "How start?", listing multiple possible justifications for a U.
S.
–Iraq War.
[89][90]
During 2002, the amount of ordnance used by British and American aircraft patrolling the no-fly zones of Iraq increased compared to the previous years[91] and by August had "become a full air offensive".
Tommy Franks, the allied commander, later stated that the bombing was designed to "degrade" the Iraqi air defense system before an invasion.
[92]
In October 2002, a few days before the United States Senate voted on the Joint Resolution to Authorize the Use of United States Armed Forces Against Iraq, about 75 senators were told in closed session that Iraq had the means of attacking the Eastern Seaboard of the U.
S.
with biological or chemical weapons delivered by unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs.
)[54] On 5 February 2003, Colin Powell presented further evidence in his Iraqi WMD program presentation to the UN Security Council that UAVs were ready to be launched against the United States.
At the time, there was a vigorous dispute within the U.
S.
military and intelligence communities as to whether CIA conclusions about Iraqi UAVs were accurate[93] and other intelligence agencies suggested that Iraq did not possess any offensive UAV capability, saying the few they had were designed for surveillance and intended for reconnaissance.
[94] The Senate voted to approve the Joint Resolution with the support of large bipartisan majorities on 11 October 2002, providing the Bush administration with a legal basis for the U.
The resolution granted the authorization by the Constitution of the United States and the United States Congress for the President to command the military to fight anti-United States violence.
Citing the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998, the resolution reiterated that it should be the policy of the United States to remove the Saddam regime and promote a democratic replacement.
The authorization was signed by President George W.
Bush on 16 October 2002.
Chief UN weapons inspector Hans Blix remarked in January 2003 that "Iraq appears not to have come to a genuine acceptance—not even today—of the disarmament, which was demanded of it and which it needs to carry out to win the confidence of the world and to live in peace.
"[95] Among other things he noted that 1,000 short tons (910 t) of chemical agent were unaccounted for, information on Iraq's VX nerve agent program was missing, and that "no convincing evidence" was presented for the destruction of 8,500 litres (1,900 imp gal; 2,200 US gal) of anthrax that had been declared.
[95]
United States Secretary of State Colin Powell holding a model vial of anthrax while giving a presentation to the United Nations Security Council
In the 2003 State of the Union address, President Bush said "we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s, had several mobile biological weapons labs".
On 5 February 2003, Secretary of State Colin Powell appeared before the UN to present evidence that Iraq was hiding unconventional weapons.
[96] The French government also believed that Saddam had stockpiles of anthrax and botulism toxin, and the ability to produce VX.
[97] In March, Blix said progress had been made in inspections, and no evidence of WMD had been found.
[98] Iraqi scientist Rafid Ahmed Alwan al-Janabi codenamed "Curveball", admitted in February 2011, that he lied to the CIA about biological weapons in order to get the U.
S.
to attack and remove Saddam from power.
[99]
From the left: French President Jacques Chirac, U.S. President George W. Bush, UK Prime Minister Tony Blair and Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.
Chirac was against the invasion, the other three leaders were in favor.
In early 2003, the U.S., British, and Spanish governments proposed the so-called "eighteenth resolution" to give Iraq a deadline for compliance with previous resolutions enforced by the threat of military action.
This proposed resolution was subsequently withdrawn due to lack of support on the UN Security Council.
In particular, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) members France, Germany and Canada and non-NATO member Russia were opposed to military intervention in Iraq, due to the high level of risk to the international community's security, and defended disarmament through diplomacy.
[100][101]
A meeting between George W. Bush and Tony Blair took place on 31 January 2003, in the White House. A secret memo of this meeting purportedly showed that the Bush administration had already decided on the invasion of Iraq at that point.
Bush was allegedly floating the idea of painting a U‑2 spyplane in UN colors and letting it fly low over Iraq to provoke Iraqi forces into shooting it down, thereby providing a pretext for the United States and Britain to invade.
Bush and Blair made a secret deal to carry out the invasion regardless of whether WMD were discovered by UN weapons inspectors, in direct contradiction with statements Blair made to the British House of Commons afterwards that the Iraqi regime would be given a final chance to disarm.
In the memo, Bush is paraphrased as saying, "The start date for the military campaign was now pencilled in for 10 March.
"[102] Bush said to Blair that he "thought it unlikely that there would be internecine warfare between the different religious and ethnic groups" in Iraq after the war.
In October 2002, former U.S. President Bill Clinton warned about possible dangers of pre-emptive military action against Iraq.
Speaking in the UK on a Labour Party conference he said: "As a preemptive action today, however well-justified, may come back with unwelcome consequences in the future.
.
.
.
I don't care how precise your bombs and your weapons are, when you set them off, innocent people will die.
"[103][104] Hillary Clinton while serving as senator voted in favor for military action, though she now says it was a mistake.
[105] The majority of Democrats in Congress voted against the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002, although a majority of Democrats in the Senate voted in favor of it.
Sen.
Jim Webb wrote shortly before the vote "Those who are pushing for a unilateral war in Iraq know full well that there is no exit strategy if we invade.
Anti-War protest in London, September 2002. Organised by the British Stop the War Coalition, up to 400,000 took part in the protest.
[107]
On 20 January 2003, French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin declared "we believe that military intervention would be the worst solution".
[108] Meanwhile, anti-war groups across the world organised public protests.
According to French academic Dominique Reynié, between 3 January and 12 April 2003, 36 million people across the globe took part in almost 3,000 protests against war in Iraq, with demonstrations on 15 February 2003, being the largest and most prolific.
[109] Nelson Mandela voiced his opposition in late January, stating "All that (Mr.
Bush) wants is Iraqi oil," and questioning if Bush deliberately undermined the U.
N.
"because the secretary-general of the United Nations [was] a black man".
[110]
In February 2003, the U.S. Army's top general, Eric Shinseki, told the Senate Armed Services Committee that it would take "several hundred thousand soldiers" to secure Iraq.
[111] Two days later, U.
S.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said the post-war troop commitment would be less than the number of troops required to win the war, and that "the idea that it would take several hundred thousand U.
S.
forces is far from the mark.
" Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said Shinseki's estimate was "way off the mark," because other countries would take part in an occupying force.
[112]
In March 2003, Hans Blix reported that "No evidence of proscribed activities have so far been found" in Iraq, saying that progress was made in inspections, which would continue.
He estimated the time remaining for disarmament being verified through inspections to be "months".
[98] But the U.
S.
government announced that "diplomacy has failed", and that it would proceed with a coalition of allied countries—named the "coalition of the willing"—to rid Iraq of its alleged WMD.
The U.
S.
government abruptly advised UN weapons inspectors to leave Baghdad immediately.
On March 25, 2003 at a post-Oscar party, a pensive Donald Trump, with Melania Knauss at his side, commented on the Iraq war, "If they keep fighting it the way they did today, they're going to have a real problem.
.
.
The war's a mess.
"[113]
There were serious legal questions surrounding the launching of the war against Iraq and the Bush Doctrine of preemptive war in general.
On 16 September 2004, Kofi Annan, the Secretary General of the United Nations, said of the invasion, "I have indicated it was not in conformity with the UN Charter.
From our point of view, from the Charter point of view, it was illegal.
"
In November 2008 Lord Bingham, the former British Law Lord, described the war a serious violation of international law, and accused Britain and the United States of acting like a "world vigilante".
He also criticized the post-invasion record of Britain as "an occupying power in Iraq".
Regarding the treatment of Iraqi detainees in Abu Ghraib, Bingham said: "Particularly disturbing to proponents of the rule of law is the cynical lack of concern for international legality among some top officials in the Bush administration.
"[114] In July 2010, Deputy Prime Minister of the UK Nick Clegg, in an official PMQs session in Parliament, condemned the invasion of Iraq as illegal.
[115] Theorist Francis Fukuyama has argued that "the Iraq war and the close association it created between military invasion and democracy promotion tarnished the latter".
Destroyed remains of Iraqi tanks near Al Qadisiyah
US Marines escort captured enemy prisoners to a holding area in the desert of Iraq on 21 March 2003.
U.S. soldiers at the Hands of Victory monument in Baghdad
The first Central Intelligence Agency team entered Iraq on 10 July 2002.[117] This team was composed of members of the CIA's Special Activities Division and was later joined by members of the U.
S.
military's elite Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC).
[118] Together, they prepared for the invasion of conventional forces.
These efforts consisted of persuading the commanders of several Iraqi military divisions to surrender rather than oppose the invasion, and to identify all of the initial leadership targets during very high risk reconnaissance missions.
[118]
Most importantly, their efforts organized the Kurdish Peshmerga to become the northern front of the invasion.
Together this force defeated Ansar al-Islam in Iraqi Kurdistan before the invasion and then defeated the Iraqi army in the north.
[118][119] The battle against Ansar al-Islam led to the death of a substantial number of militants and the uncovering of a chemical weapons facility at Sargat.
[117][120]
At 5:34 a.m. Baghdad time on 20 March 2003 (9:34 p.m., 19 March EST) the surprise[121] military invasion of Iraq began.
[122] There was no declaration of war.
[123] The 2003 invasion of Iraq, led by U.
S.
Army General Tommy Franks, under the code-name "Operation Iraqi Freedom",[124] the UK code-name Operation Telic, and the Australian code-name Operation Falconer.
Coalition forces also cooperated with Kurdish Peshmerga forces in the north.
Approximately forty other governments, the "Coalition of the Willing," participated by providing troops, equipment, services, security, and special forces, with 248,000 soldiers from the United States, 45,000 British soldiers, 2,000 Australian soldiers and 194 Polish soldiers from Special Forces unit GROM sent to Kuwait for the invasion.
[125] The invasion force was also supported by Iraqi Kurdish militia troops, estimated to number upwards of 70,000.
Iraqi tank on Highway 27 destroyed in April 2003
According to General Tommy Franks, there were eight objectives of the invasion, "First, ending the regime of Saddam Hussein.
Second, to identify, isolate, and eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
Third, to search for, to capture, and to drive out terrorists from that country.
Fourth, to collect such intelligence as we can related to terrorist networks.
Fifth, to collect such intelligence as we can related to the global network of illicit weapons of mass destruction.
Sixth, to end sanctions and to immediately deliver humanitarian support to the displaced and to many needy Iraqi citizens.
Seventh, to secure Iraq's oil fields and resources, which belong to the Iraqi people.
And last, to help the Iraqi people create conditions for a transition to a representative self-government.
"[127]
Map of the invasion routes and major operations/battles of the Iraq War as of 2007
The invasion was a quick and decisive operation encountering major resistance, though not what the U.
S.
, British and other forces expected.
The Iraqi regime had prepared to fight both a conventional and irregular war at the same time, conceding territory when faced with superior conventional forces, largely armored, but launching smaller scale attacks in the rear using fighters dressed in civilian and paramilitary clothes.
Since the initiation of the war in Iraq, numerous programs were created to "enhance psychological resilience and prevent psychological morbidity in troops.
"[128]
Coalition troops launched air and amphibious assault on the Al-Faw peninsula to secure the oil fields there and the important ports, supported by warships of the Royal Navy, Polish Navy, and Royal Australian Navy.
The United States Marine Corps' 15th  Marine Expeditionary Unit, attached to 3 Commando Brigade and the Polish Special Forces unit GROM attacked the port of Umm Qasr, while the British Army's 16 Air Assault Brigade secured the oil fields in southern Iraq.
photograph of three Marines entering a partially destroyed stone palace with a mural of Arabic script
U.S. Marines from 1st Battalion 7th Marines enter a palace during the Fall of Baghdad.
The heavy armor of the U.S. 3rd Infantry Division moved westward and then northward through the western desert toward Baghdad, while the 1st Marine Expeditionary Force moved more easterly along Highway 1 through the center of the country, and 1 (UK) Armoured Division moved northward through the eastern marshland.
The U.
S.
1st Marine Division fought through Nasiriyah in a battle to seize the major road junction and nearby Talil Airfield.
The United States Army 3rd Infantry Division defeated Iraqi forces entrenched in and around the airfield.
With the Nasiriyah and Talil Airfields secured in its rear, the 3rd Infantry Division supported by 101st Airborne Division continued its attack north toward Najaf and Karbala, but a severe sand storm slowed the coalition advance and there was a halt to consolidate and make sure the supply lines were secure.
When they started again they secured the Karbala Gap, a key approach to Baghdad, then secured the bridges over the Euphrates River, and U.
S.
forces poured through the gap on to Baghdad.
In the middle of Iraq, the 1st Marine Division fought its way to the eastern side of Baghdad, and prepared for the attack into Baghdad to seize it.
[129]
In the north, OIF‑1 used the largest special operations force since the successful attack on the Taliban government of Afghanistan just over a year earlier.
On 9 April, Baghdad fell, ending Saddam's 24‑year rule. U.S. forces seized the deserted Ba'ath Party ministries and stage-managed[130] the tearing down of a huge iron statue of Saddam, photos and video of which became symbolic of the event, although later controversial.
Not seen in the photos or heard on the videos, shot with a zoom lens, was the chant of the inflamed crowd for Muqtada al-Sadr, the radical Shiite cleric.
[131] In November 2008, Iraqi protesters staged a similar stomping on and burning of an effigy of George W.
Bush.
[132] The abrupt fall of Baghdad was accompanied by a widespread outpouring of gratitude toward the invaders, but also massive civil disorder, including the looting of public and government buildings and drastically increased crime.
[133][134]
According to the Pentagon, 250,000 short tons (230,000 t) (of 650,000 short tons (590,000 t) total) of ordnance was looted, providing a significant source of ammunition for the Iraqi insurgency.
The invasion phase concluded when Tikrit, Saddam's home town, fell with little resistance to the U.
S.
Marines of Task Force Tripoli.
In the invasion phase of the war (19 March–30 April), an estimated 9,200 Iraqi combatants were killed by coalition forces along with an estimated 3,750 non-combatants, i.
e.
civilians who did not take up arms.
[135] Coalition forces reported the death in combat of 139 U.
S.
military personnel[136] and 33 UK military personnel.
[137]
A Marine Corps M1 Abrams tank patrols a Baghdad street after its fall in 2003 during Operation Iraqi Freedom.
18 May 2004: Staff Sgt. Kevin Jessen checks the underside of two anti-tank mines found in a village outside Ad Dujayl in the Sunni Triangle.
Polish GROM forces in sea operations during Operation Iraqi Freedom
Marines from D Company, 3rd Light Armored Reconnaissance Battalion guard detainees prior to loading them into their vehicle.
On 1 May 2003, President Bush visited the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln operating a few miles west of San Diego, California.
At sunset Bush held his nationally televised "Mission Accomplished" speech, delivered before the sailors and airmen on the flight deck: Bush declared victory due to the defeat of Iraq's conventional forces.
Nevertheless, Saddam remained at large and significant pockets of resistance remained. After President Bush's speech, coalition forces noticed a gradually increasing flurry of attacks on its troops in various regions, especially in the "Sunni Triangle".
[138] The initial Iraqi insurgents were supplied by hundreds of weapons caches created before the invasion by the Iraqi army and Republican Guard.
Initially, Iraqi resistance (described by the coalition as "Anti-Iraqi Forces") largely stemmed from fedayeen and Saddam/Ba'ath Party loyalists, but soon religious radicals and Iraqis angered by the occupation contributed to the insurgency.
The three provinces with the highest number of attacks were Baghdad, Al Anbar, and Salah Ad Din.
Those three provinces account for 35% of the population, but as of 5 December 2006, were responsible for 73% of U.
S.
military deaths and an even higher percentage of recent U.
S.
military deaths (about 80%.
)[139]
Insurgents used guerrilla tactics including: mortars, missiles, suicide attacks, snipers, improvised explosive devices (IEDs), car bombs, small arms fire (usually with assault rifles), and RPGs (rocket propelled grenades), as well as sabotage against the petroleum, water, and electrical infrastructure.
Post-invasion Iraq coalition efforts commenced after the fall of Saddam's regime. The coalition nations, together with the United Nations, began to work to establish a stable, compliant democratic state capable of defending itself from non-coalition forces, as well as overcoming internal divisions.
[140][141]
Meanwhile, coalition military forces launched several operations around the Tigris River peninsula and in the Sunni Triangle.
A series of similar operations were launched throughout the summer in the Sunni Triangle.
Toward the end of 2003, the intensity and pace of insurgent attacks began to increase.
A sharp surge in guerrilla attacks ushered in an insurgent effort that was termed the "Ramadan Offensive", as it coincided with the beginning of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.
To counter this offensive, coalition forces begin to use air power and artillery again for the first time since the end of the invasion by striking suspected ambush sites and mortar launching positions.
Surveillance of major routes, patrols, and raids on suspected insurgents were stepped up.
In addition, two villages, including Saddam's birthplace of al-Auja and the small town of Abu Hishma were surrounded by barbed wire and carefully monitored.
Coalition Provisional Authority and the Iraq Survey Group
Occupation zones in Iraq as of September 2003
Shortly after the invasion, the multinational coalition created the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA; Arabic: سلطة الائتلاف الموحدة‎), based in the Green Zone, as a transitional government of Iraq until the establishment of a democratic government.
Citing United Nations Security Council Resolution 1483 (22 May 2003) and the laws of war, the CPA vested itself with executive, legislative, and judicial authority over the Iraqi government from the period of the CPA's inception on 21 April 2003, until its dissolution on 28 June 2004.
The CPA was originally headed by Jay Garner, a former U.S. military officer, but his appointment lasted only until 11 May 2003, when President Bush appointed L.
Paul Bremer.
On 16 May 2003 on his first day on the job Paul Bremer issued CPA executive order No1 to exclude from the new Iraqi government and administration members of the Baathist party.
This eventually led to the removal of 85,000 to 100,000 Iraqi people from their job.
[142] including 40,000 school teachers who had joined the Baath Party simply to keep their jobs.
U.
S.
army general Sanchez called the decision a "catastrophic failure"[143] Bremer served until the CPA's dissolution in July 2004.
Another group created by the multinational force in Iraq post-invasion was the 1,400-member international Iraq Survey Group who conducted a fact-finding mission to find Iraqi weapons of mass destruction (WMD) programmes.
In 2004 the ISG's Duelfer Report[144] stated that Iraq did not have a viable WMD program.
Saddam Hussein being pulled from his hideaway in Operation Red Dawn, 13 December 2003.
Two insurgents in Iraq with SA-7b and SA-14 MANPADS
In the summer of 2003, the multinational forces focused on capturing the remaining leaders of the former government.
On 22 July, a raid by the U.
S.
101st Airborne Division and soldiers from Task Force 20 killed Saddam's sons (Uday and Qusay) along with one of his grandsons.
In all, over 300 top leaders of the former government were killed or captured, as well as numerous lesser functionaries and military personnel.
Most significantly, Saddam Hussein himself was captured on 13 December 2003, on a farm near Tikrit in Operation Red Dawn.
[145] The operation was conducted by the United States Army's 4th Infantry Division and members of Task Force 121.
Intelligence on Saddam's whereabouts came from his family members and former bodyguards.
[146]
With the capture of Saddam and a drop in the number of insurgent attacks, some concluded the multinational forces were prevailing in the fight against the insurgency.
The provisional government began training the new Iraqi security forces intended to police the country, and the United States promised over $20 billion in reconstruction money in the form of credit against Iraq's future oil revenues.
Oil revenue was also used for rebuilding schools and for work on the electrical and refining infrastructure.
Shortly after the capture of Saddam, elements left out of the Coalition Provisional Authority began to agitate for elections and the formation of an Iraqi Interim Government.
Most prominent among these was the Shia cleric Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.
The Coalition Provisional Authority opposed allowing democratic elections at this time.
[147] The insurgents stepped up their activities.
The two most turbulent centers were the area around Fallujah and the poor Shia sections of cities from Baghdad (Sadr City) to Basra in the south.
See also: Military operations of the Iraq War for a list of all Coalition operations for this period, 2004 in Iraq, Iraqi coalition counter-insurgency operations, Iraqi insurgency (2003–11), United States occupation of Fallujah, Iraq Spring Fighting of 2004
File:Apache-killing-Iraq.avi.oggPlay media
Footage from the gun camera of a U.S. Apache helicopter killing suspected Iraqi insurgents[148]
Coalition Provisional Authority director L. Paul Bremer signs over sovereignty to the appointed Iraqi Interim Government, 28 June 2004.
The start of 2004 was marked by a relative lull in violence. Insurgent forces reorganised during this time, studying the multinational forces' tactics and planning a renewed offensive.
However, violence did increase during the Iraq Spring Fighting of 2004 with foreign fighters from around the Middle East as well as al-Qaeda in Iraq (an affiliated al-Qaeda group), led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi helping to drive the insurgency.
As the insurgency grew there was a distinct change in targeting from the coalition forces towards the new Iraqi Security Forces, as hundreds of Iraqi civilians and police were killed over the next few months in a series of massive bombings.
An organized Sunni insurgency, with deep roots and both nationalist and Islamist motivations, was becoming more powerful throughout Iraq.
The Shia Mahdi Army also began launching attacks on coalition targets in an attempt to seize control from Iraqi security forces.
The southern and central portions of Iraq were beginning to erupt in urban guerrilla combat as multinational forces attempted to keep control and prepared for a counteroffensive.
A USMC M198 artillery piece firing outside Fallujah in October 2004.
The most serious fighting of the war so far began on 31 March 2004, when Iraqi insurgents in Fallujah ambushed a Blackwater USA convoy led by four U.
S.
private military contractors who were providing security for food caterers Eurest Support Services.
[149] The four armed contractors, Scott Helvenston, Jerko Zovko, Wesley Batalona, and Michael Teague, were killed with grenades and small arms fire.
Subsequently, their bodies were dragged from their vehicles by local people, beaten, set ablaze, and their burned corpses hung over a bridge crossing the Euphrates.
[150] Photos of the event were released to news agencies worldwide, causing a great deal of indignation and moral outrage in the United States, and prompting an unsuccessful "pacification" of the city: the First Battle of Fallujah in April 2004.
The offensive was resumed in November 2004 in the bloodiest battle of the war so far: the Second Battle of Fallujah, described by the U.
S.
military as "the heaviest urban combat (that they had been involved in) since the battle of Hue City in Vietnam.
"[151] During the assault, U.
S.
forces used white phosphorus as an incendiary weapon against insurgent personnel, attracting controversy.
The 46‑day battle resulted in a victory for the coalition, with 95 U.
S.
soldiers killed along with approximately 1,350 insurgents.
Fallujah was totally devastated during the fighting, though civilian casualties were low, as they had mostly fled before the battle.
[152]
Another major event of that year was the revelation of widespread prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib, which received international media attention in April 2004.
First reports of the Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse, as well as graphic pictures showing U.
S.
military personnel taunting and abusing Iraqi prisoners, came to public attention from a 60 Minutes II news report (28 April) and a Seymour M.
Hersh article in The New Yorker (posted online on 30 April.
)[153] Military correspondent Thomas Ricks claimed that these revelations dealt a blow to the moral justifications for the occupation in the eyes of many people, especially Iraqis, and was a turning point in the war.
[154]
2004 also marked the beginning of Military Transition Teams in Iraq, which were teams of U.S. military advisors assigned directly to New Iraqi Army units.
2005: Elections and transitional government
Convention center for Council of Representatives of Iraq
On 31 January, Iraqis elected the Iraqi Transitional Government in order to draft a permanent constitution.
Although some violence and a widespread Sunni boycott marred the event, most of the eligible Kurd and Shia populace participated.
On 4 February, Paul Wolfowitz announced that 15,000 U.
S.
troops whose tours of duty had been extended in order to provide election security would be pulled out of Iraq by the next month.
[155] February to April proved to be relatively peaceful months compared to the carnage of November and January, with insurgent attacks averaging 30 a day from the prior average of 70.
The Battle of Abu Ghraib on 2 April 2005 was an attack on United States forces at Abu Ghraib prison, which consisted of heavy mortar and rocket fire, under which armed insurgents attacked with grenades, small arms, and two vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices (VBIED).
The U.
S.
force's munitions ran so low that orders to fix bayonets were given in preparation for hand-to-hand fighting.
An estimated 80–120 armed insurgents launched a massive coordinated assault on the U.
S.
military facility and internment camp at Abu Ghraib, Iraq.
It was considered to be the largest coordinated assault on a U.
S.
base since the Vietnam War.
[156]
Hopes for a quick end to the insurgency and a withdrawal of U.S. troops were dashed in May, Iraq's bloodiest month since the invasion.
Suicide bombers, believed to be mainly disheartened Iraqi Sunni Arabs, Syrians and Saudis, tore through Iraq.
Their targets were often Shia gatherings or civilian concentrations of Shias.
As a result, over 700 Iraqi civilians died in that month, as well as 79 U.
S.
soldiers.
The summer of 2005 saw fighting around Baghdad and at Tall Afar in northwestern Iraq as U.S. forces tried to seal off the Syrian border.
This led to fighting in the autumn in the small towns of the Euphrates valley between the capital and that border.
[157]
A referendum was held on 15 October in which the new Iraqi constitution was ratified. An Iraqi national assembly was elected in December, with participation from the Sunnis as well as the Kurds and Shia.
[157]
Insurgent attacks increased in 2005 with 34,131 recorded incidents, compared to a total 26,496 for the previous year.
[158]
2006: Civil war and permanent Iraqi government
U.S. Marines from 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines clear a house in Al Anbar Governorate.
The beginning of 2006 was marked by government creation talks, growing sectarian violence, and continuous anti-coalition attacks.
Sectarian violence expanded to a new level of intensity following the al-Askari Mosque bombing in the Iraqi city of Samarra, on 22 February 2006.
The explosion at the mosque, one of the holiest sites in Shi'a Islam, is believed to have been caused by a bomb planted by al-Qaeda.
Although no injuries occurred in the blast, the mosque was severely damaged and the bombing resulted in violence over the following days.
Over 100 dead bodies with bullet holes were found on 23 February, and at least 165 people are thought to have been killed.
In the aftermath of this attack the U.
S.
military calculated that the average homicide rate in Baghdad tripled from 11 to 33 deaths per day.
In 2006 the UN described the environment in Iraq as a "civil war-like situation".
[159]
On March 12, five United States Army soldiers of the 502nd Infantry Regiment, raped the 14-year-old Iraqi girl Abeer Qassim Hamza al‑Janabi, and then murdered her, her father, her mother Fakhriya Taha Muhasen and her six-year-old sister Hadeel Qassim Hamza al-Janabi.
The soldiers then set fire to the girl's body to conceal evidence of the crime.
[160] Four of the soldiers were convicted of rape and murder and the fifth was convicted of lesser crimes for the involvement in the war crime, that became known as the Mahmudiyah killings.
[161][162]
Nouri al-Maliki meets with George W. Bush, June 2006
On 6 June 2006, the United States was successful in tracking Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of al-Qaeda in Iraq who was killed in a targeted killing, while attending a meeting in an isolated safehouse approximately 8 km (5.
0 mi) north of Baqubah.
Having been tracked by a British UAV, radio contact was made between the controller and two United States Air Force F-16C jets, which identified the house and at 14:15 GMT, the lead jet dropped two 500‑pound (230 kg) guided bombs, a laser-guided GBU‑12 and GPS-guided GBU‑38 on the building where he was located at.
Six others—three male and three female individuals—were also reported killed.
Among those killed were one of his wives and their child.
The current government of Iraq took office on 20 May 2006, following approval by the members of the Iraqi National Assembly.
This followed the general election in December 2005.
The government succeeded the Iraqi Transitional Government, which had continued in office in a caretaker capacity until the formation of the permanent government.
Iraq Study Group report and Saddam's execution
The Iraq Study Group Report was released on 6 December 2006. Iraq Study Group, made up of people from both of the major U.
S.
parties, was led by co-chairs James Baker, a former Secretary of State (Republican), and Lee H.
Hamilton, a former U.
S.
Representative (Democrat).
It concluded that "the situation in Iraq is grave and deteriorating" and "U.
S.
forces seem to be caught in a mission that has no foreseeable end.
" The report's 79 recommendations include increasing diplomatic measures with Iran and Syria and intensifying efforts to train Iraqi troops.
On 18 December, a Pentagon report found that insurgent attacks were averaging about 960 attacks per week, the highest since the reports had begun in 2005.
[163]
Coalition forces formally transferred control of a province to the Iraqi government, the first since the war.
Military prosecutors charged eight U.
S.
Marines with the murders of 24 Iraqi civilians in Haditha in November 2005, 10 of them women and children.
Four officers were also charged with dereliction of duty in relation to the event.
[164]
Saddam Hussein was hanged on 30 December 2006, after being found guilty of crimes against humanity by an Iraqi court after a year-long trial.
[165]
President George W. Bush announces the new strategy on Iraq from the White House Library, 10 January 2007.
In a 10 January 2007, televised address to the U.S. public, Bush proposed 21,500 more troops for Iraq, a job program for Iraqis, more reconstruction proposals, and $1.
2 billion for these programs.
[166] On 23 January 2007, in the 2007 State of the Union Address, Bush announced "deploying reinforcements of more than 20,000 additional soldiers and Marines to Iraq".
On 10 February 2007, David Petraeus was made commander of Multi-National Force – Iraq (MNF-I), the four-star post that oversees all coalition forces in country, replacing General George Casey.
In his new position, Petraeus oversaw all coalition forces in Iraq and employed them in the new "Surge" strategy outlined by the Bush administration.
[167][168] 2007 also saw a sharp increase in insurgent chlorine bombings.
On 10 May 2007, 144 Iraqi Parliamentary lawmakers signed onto a legislative petition calling on the United States to set a timetable for withdrawal.
[169] On 3 June 2007, the Iraqi Parliament voted 85 to 59 to require the Iraqi government to consult with Parliament before requesting additional extensions of the UN Security Council Mandate for Coalition operations in Iraq.
[170] Despite this, the mandate was renewed on 18 December 2007, without the approval of the Iraqi parliament.
[171]
Pressures on U.S. troops were compounded by the continuing withdrawal of coalition forces. In early 2007, British Prime Minister Blair announced that following Operation Sinbad British troops would begin to withdraw from Basra Governorate, handing security over to the Iraqis.
[172] In July Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen also announced the withdrawal of 441 Danish troops from Iraq, leaving only a unit of nine soldiers manning four observational helicopters.
[173]
In a speech made to Congress on 10 September 2007, Petraeus "envisioned the withdrawal of roughly 30,000 U.
S.
troops by next summer, beginning with a Marine contingent [in September].
"[174] On 13 September, Bush backed a limited withdrawal of troops from Iraq.
[175] Bush said 5,700 personnel would be home by Christmas 2007, and expected thousands more to return by July 2008.
The plan would take troop numbers back to their level before the surge at the beginning of 2007.
U.S. soldiers take cover during a firefight with insurgents in the Al Doura section of Baghdad 7 March 2007.
By March 2008, violence in Iraq was reported curtailed by 40–80%, according to a Pentagon report.[176] Independent reports[177][178] raised questions about those assessments.
An Iraqi military spokesman claimed that civilian deaths since the start of the troop surge plan were 265 in Baghdad, down from 1,440 in the four previous weeks.
The New York Times counted more than 450 Iraqi civilians killed during the same 28‑day period, based on initial daily reports from Iraqi Interior Ministry and hospital officials.
Historically, the daily counts tallied by The New York Times have underestimated the total death toll by 50% or more when compared to studies by the United Nations, which rely upon figures from the Iraqi Health Ministry and morgue figures.
[179]
The rate of U.S. combat deaths in Baghdad nearly doubled to 3.14 per day in the first seven weeks of the "surge" in security activity, compared to previous period.
Across the rest of Iraq it decreased slightly.
[180][181]
On 14 August 2007, the deadliest single attack of the whole war occurred. Nearly 800 civilians were killed by a series of coordinated suicide bomb attacks on the northern Iraqi settlement of Kahtaniya.
More than 100 homes and shops were destroyed in the blasts.
U.
S.
officials blamed al‑Qaeda.
The targeted villagers belonged to the non-Muslim Yazidi ethnic minority.
The attack may have represented the latest in a feud that erupted earlier that year when members of the Yazidi community stoned to death a teenage girl called Du'a Khalil Aswad accused of dating a Sunni Arab man and converting to Islam.
The killing of the girl was recorded on camera-mobiles and the video was uploaded onto the internet.
[182][183][184][185]
On 13 September 2007, Abdul Sattar Abu Risha was killed in a bomb attack in the city of Ramadi.[186] He was an important U.
S.
ally because he led the "Anbar Awakening", an alliance of Sunni Arab tribes that opposed al-Qaeda.
The latter organisation claimed responsibility for the attack.
[187] A statement posted on the Internet by the shadowy Islamic State of Iraq called Abu Risha "one of the dogs of Bush" and described Thursday's killing as a "heroic operation that took over a month to prepare".
[188]
A graph of U.S. troop fatalities in Iraq March 2003 – July 2010, the orange and blue months are the period of the troop surge and its aftermath.
There was a reported trend of decreasing U.S. troop deaths after May 2007,[189] and violence against coalition troops had fallen to the "lowest levels since the first year of the American invasion".
[190] These, and several other positive developments, were attributed to the surge by many analysts.
[191]
Data from the Pentagon and other U.S. agencies such as the Government Accountability Office (GAO) found that daily attacks against civilians in Iraq remained "about the same" since February.
The GAO also stated that there was no discernible trend in sectarian violence.
[192] However, this report ran counter to reports to Congress, which showed a general downward trend in civilian deaths and ethno-sectarian violence since December 2006.
[193] By late 2007, as the U.
S.
troop surge began to wind down, violence in Iraq had begun to decrease from its 2006 highs.
[194]
Entire neighborhoods in Baghdad were ethnically cleansed by Shia and Sunni militias and sectarian violence has broken out in every Iraqi city where there is a mixed population.
[195][196][197] Investigative reporter Bob Woodward cites U.
S.
government sources according to which the U.
S.
"surge" was not the primary reason for the drop in violence in 2007–08.
Instead, according to that view, the reduction of violence was due to newer covert techniques by U.
S.
military and intelligence officials to find, target and kill insurgents, including working closely with former insurgents.
[198]
In the Shia region near Basra, British forces turned over security for the region to Iraqi Security Forces.
Basra is the ninth province of Iraq's 18 provinces to be returned to local security forces' control since the beginning of the occupation.
[199]
Official Iraq-benchmark of the Congress, 2007
More than half of the members of Iraq's parliament rejected the continuing occupation of their country for the first time.
144 of the 275 lawmakers signed onto a legislative petition that would require the Iraqi government to seek approval from Parliament before it requests an extension of the UN mandate for foreign forces to be in Iraq, which expires at the end of 2008.
It also calls for a timetable for troop withdrawal and a freeze on the size of foreign forces.
The UN Security Council mandate for U.
S.
‑led forces in Iraq will terminate "if requested by the government of Iraq.
"[200] Under Iraqi law, the speaker must present a resolution called for by a majority of lawmakers.
[201] 59% of those polled in the U.
S.
support a timetable for withdrawal.
[202]
In mid-2007, the Coalition began a controversial program to recruit Iraqi Sunnis (often former insurgents) for the formation of "Guardian" militias.
These Guardian militias are intended to support and secure various Sunni neighborhoods against the Islamists.
[203]
In 2007, tensions increased greatly between Iran and Iraqi Kurdistan due to the latter's giving sanctuary to the militant Kurdish secessionist group Party for a Free Life in Kurdistan (PEJAK.
) According to reports, Iran had been shelling PEJAK positions in Iraqi Kurdistan since 16 August.
These tensions further increased with an alleged border incursion on 23 August by Iranian troops who attacked several Kurdish villages killing an unknown number of civilians and militants.
[204]
Coalition forces also began to target alleged Iranian Quds force operatives in Iraq, either arresting or killing suspected members.
The Bush administration and coalition leaders began to publicly state that Iran was supplying weapons, particularly EFP devices, to Iraqi insurgents and militias although to date have failed to provide any proof for these allegations.
Further sanctions on Iranian organizations were also announced by the Bush administration in the autumn of 2007.
On 21 November 2007, Lieutenant General James Dubik, who is in charge of training Iraqi security forces, praised Iran for its "contribution to the reduction of violence" in Iraq by upholding its pledge to stop the flow of weapons, explosives and training of extremists in Iraq.
[205]
Border incursions by PKK militants based in Northern Iraq have continued to harass Turkish forces, with casualties on both sides.
In the fall of 2007, the Turkish military stated their right to cross the Iraqi Kurdistan border in "hot pursuit" of PKK militants and began shelling Kurdish areas in Iraq and attacking PKK bases in the Mount Cudi region with aircraft.
[206][207] The Turkish parliament approved a resolution permitting the military to pursue the PKK in Iraqi Kurdistan.
[208] In November, Turkish gunships attacked parts of northern Iraq in the first such attack by Turkish aircraft since the border tensions escalated.
[209] Another series of attacks in mid-December hit PKK targets in the Qandil, Zap, Avashin and Hakurk regions.
The latest series of attacks involved at least 50 aircraft and artillery and Kurdish officials reported one civilian killed and two wounded.
Additionally, weapons that were given to Iraqi security forces by the U.S. military were being recovered by authorities in Turkey after being used by PKK in that state.
[211]
On 17 September 2007, the Iraqi government announced that it was revoking the license of the U.S. security firm Blackwater USA over the firm's involvement in the killing of eight civilians, including a woman and an infant,[212] in a firefight that followed a car bomb explosion near a State Department motorcade.
Soldiers of the 3rd Brigade, 14th Iraqi Army division graduate from basic training.
Throughout 2008, U.S. officials and independent think tanks began to point to improvements in the security situation, as measured by key statistics.
According to the U.
S.
Defense Department, in December 2008 the "overall level of violence" in the country had dropped 80% since before the surge began in January 2007, and the country's murder rate had dropped to prewar levels.
They also pointed out that the casualty figure for U.
S.
forces in 2008 was 314 against a figure of 904 in 2007.
[213]
According to the Brookings Institution, Iraqi civilian fatalities numbered 490 in November 2008 as against 3,500 in January 2007, whereas attacks against the coalition numbered somewhere between 200 and 300 per week in the latter half of 2008, as opposed to a peak of nearly 1,600 in summer 2007.
The number of Iraqi security forces killed was under 100 per month in the second half of 2008, from a high of 200 to 300 in summer 2007.
[214]
Meanwhile, the proficiency of the Iraqi military increased as it launched a spring offensive against Shia militias, which Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki had previously been criticized for allowing to operate.
This began with a March operation against the Mehdi Army in Basra, which led to fighting in Shia areas up and down the country, especially in the Sadr City district of Baghdad.
By October, the British officer in charge of Basra said that since the operation the town had become "secure" and had a murder rate comparable to Manchester in England.
[215] The U.
S.
military also said there had been a decrease of about a quarter in the quantity of Iranian-made explosives found in Iraq in 2008, possibly indicating a change in Iranian policy.
[216]
Progress in Sunni areas continued after members of the Awakening movement were transferred from U.S. military to Iraqi control.
[217] In May, the Iraqi army – backed by coalition support – launched an offensive in Mosul, the last major Iraqi stronghold of al-Qaeda.
Despite detaining thousands of individuals, the offensive failed to lead to major long-term security improvements in Mosul.
At the end of the year, the city remained a major flashpoint.
[218][219]
3D map of southern Turkey and northern Iraq
In the regional dimension, the ongoing conflict between Turkey and PKK[220][221][222] intensified on 21 February, when Turkey launched a ground attack into the Quandeel Mountains of Northern Iraq.
In the nine-day-long operation, around 10,000 Turkish troops advanced up to 25 km into Northern Iraq.
This was the first substantial ground incursion by Turkish forces since 1995.
[223][224]
Shortly after the incursion began, both the Iraqi cabinet and the Kurdistan regional government condemned Turkey's actions and called for the immediate withdrawal of Turkish troops from the region.
[225] Turkish troops withdrew on 29 February.
[226] The fate of the Kurds and the future of the ethnically diverse city of Kirkuk remained a contentious issue in Iraqi politics.
U.S. military officials met these trends with cautious optimism as they approached what they described as the "transition" embodied in the U.
S.
–Iraq Status of Forces Agreement, which was negotiated throughout 2008.
[213] The commander of the coalition, U.
S.
General Raymond T.
Odierno, noted that "in military terms, transitions are the most dangerous time" in December 2008.
[213]
An Iraqi soldier and vehicles from the 42nd Brigade, 11th Iraqi Army Division during a firefight with armed militiamen in the Sadr City district of Baghdad 17 April 2008.
At the end of March, the Iraqi Army, with Coalition air support, launched an offensive, dubbed "Charge of the Knights", in Basra to secure the area from militias.
This was the first major operation where the Iraqi Army did not have direct combat support from conventional coalition ground troops.
The offensive was opposed by the Mahdi Army, one of the militias, which controlled much of the region.
[227][228] Fighting quickly spread to other parts of Iraq: including Sadr City, Al Kut, Al Hillah and others.
During the fighting Iraqi forces met stiff resistance from militiamen in Basra to the point that the Iraqi military offensive slowed to a crawl, with the high attrition rates finally forcing the Sadrists to the negotiating table.
Following talks with Brig. Gen. Qassem Suleimani, commander of the Qods brigades of Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps, and the intercession of the Iranian government, on 31 March 2008, al‑Sadr ordered his followers to ceasefire.
[229] The militiamen kept their weapons.
By 12 May 2008, Basra "residents overwhelmingly reported a substantial improvement in their everyday lives" according to The New York Times.
"Government forces have now taken over Islamic militants' headquarters and halted the death squads and 'vice enforcers' who attacked women, Christians, musicians, alcohol sellers and anyone suspected of collaborating with Westerners", according to the report; however, when asked how long it would take for lawlessness to resume if the Iraqi army left, one resident replied, "one day".
[228]
In late April roadside bombings continued to rise from a low in January—from 114 bombings to more than 250, surpassing the May 2007 high.
General David Petraeus in testimony before Congress on 8 April 2008
Speaking before the Congress on 8 April 2008, General David Petraeus urged delaying troop withdrawals, saying, "I've repeatedly noted that we haven't turned any corners, we haven't seen any lights at the end of the tunnel," referencing the comments of then President Bush and former Vietnam-era General William Westmoreland.
[230] When asked by the Senate if reasonable people could disagree on the way forward, Petraeus said, "We fight for the right of people to have other opinions.
"[231]
Upon questioning by then Senate committee chair Joe Biden, Ambassador Crocker admitted that Al‑Qaeda in Iraq was less important than the Al Qaeda organization led by Osama bin Laden along the Afghan-Pakistani border.
[232] Lawmakers from both parties complained that U.
S.
taxpayers are carrying Iraq's burden as it earns billions of dollars in oil revenues.
An Iraqi Army unit prepares to board a Task Force Baghdad UH-60 Blackhawk helicopter for a counterinsurgency mission in Baghdad in 2007.
Iraq became one of the top current purchasers of U.S. military equipment with their army trading its AK‑47 assault rifles for the U.
S.
M‑16 and M‑4 rifles, among other equipment.
[233] In 2008 alone, Iraq accounted for more than $12.
5 billion of the $34 billion U.
S.
weapon sales to foreign countries (not including the potential F-16 fighter planes.
).
[234]
Iraq sought 36 F‑16s, the most sophisticated weapons system Iraq has attempted to purchase. The Pentagon notified Congress that it had approved the sale of 24 American attack helicopters to Iraq, valued at as much as $2.
4 billion.
Including the helicopters, Iraq announced plans to purchase at least $10 billion in U.
S.
tanks and armored vehicles, transport planes and other battlefield equipment and services.
Over the summer, the Defense Department announced that the Iraqi government wanted to order more than 400 armored vehicles and other equipment worth up to $3 billion, and six C-130J transport planes, worth up to $1.
5 billion.
[235][236] From 2005 to 2008, the United States had completed approximately $20 billion in arms sales agreements with Iraq.
[237]
The U.S.–Iraq Status of Forces Agreement was approved by the Iraqi government on 4 December 2008.[238] It established that U.
S.
combat forces would withdraw from Iraqi cities by 30 June 2009, and that all U.
S.
forces would be completely out of Iraq by 31 December 2011.
The pact was subject to possible negotiations which could have delayed withdrawal and a referendum scheduled for mid-2009 in Iraq, which might have required all U.
S.
forces to completely leave by the middle of 2010.
[239][240] The pact required criminal charges for holding prisoners over 24 hours, and required a warrant for searches of homes and buildings that are not related to combat.
[241]
U.S. contractors working for U.S. forces will be subject to Iraqi criminal law, while contractors working for the State Department and other U.
S.
agencies may retain their immunity.
If U.
S.
forces commit still undecided "major premeditated felonies" while off-duty and off-base, they will be subject to the still undecided procedures laid out by a joint U.
S.
‑Iraq committee if the United States certifies the forces were off-duty.
[242][243][244][245]
Some Americans have discussed "loopholes"[246] and some Iraqis have said they believe parts of the pact remain a "mystery".
[247] U.
S.
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has predicted that after 2011 he would expect to see "perhaps several tens of thousands of American troops" as part of a residual force in Iraq.
[248]
Several groups of Iraqis protested the passing of the SOFA accord[249][250][251] as prolonging and legitimizing the occupation.
Tens of thousands of Iraqis burned an effigy of George W.
Bush in a central Baghdad square where U.
S.
troops five years previously organized a tearing down of a statue of Saddam Hussein.
[130][247][252] Some Iraqis expressed skeptical optimism that the U.
S.
would completely end its presence by 2011.
[253] On 4 December 2008, Iraq's presidential council approved the security pact.
[238]
A representative of Grand Ayatollah Ali Husseini al‑Sistani's expressed concern with the ratified version of the pact and noted that the government of Iraq has no authority to control the transfer of occupier forces into and out of Iraq, no control of shipments, and that the pact grants the occupiers immunity from prosecution in Iraqi courts.
He said that Iraqi rule in the country is not complete while the occupiers are present, but that ultimately the Iraqi people would judge the pact in a referendum.
[252] Thousands of Iraqi have gathered weekly after Friday prayers and shouted anti‑U.
S.
and anti-Israeli slogans protesting the security pact between Baghdad and Washington.
A protester said that despite the approval of the Interim Security pact, the Iraqi people would break it in a referendum next year.
Aerial view of the Green Zone, Baghdad International Airport, and the contiguous Victory Base Complex in Baghdad
On 1 January 2009, the United States handed control of the Green Zone and Saddam Hussein's presidential palace to the Iraqi government in a ceremonial move described by the country's prime minister as a restoration of Iraq's sovereignty.
Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki said he would propose 1 January be declared national "Sovereignty Day".
"This palace is the symbol of Iraqi sovereignty and by restoring it, a real message is directed to all Iraqi people that Iraqi sovereignty has returned to its natural status", al‑Maliki said.
The U.S. military attributed a decline in reported civilians deaths to several factors including the U.
S.
‑led "troop surge", the growth of U.
S.
-funded Awakening Councils, and Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr's call for his militia to abide by a cease fire.
[255]
Election map. Shows what was the largest list in every governorate.
On 31 January, Iraq held provincial elections.[256] Provincial candidates and those close to them faced some political assassinations and attempted assassinations, and there was also some other violence related to the election.
[257][258][259][260]
Iraqi voter turnout failed to meet the original expectations which were set and was the lowest on record in Iraq,[261] but U.
S.
Ambassador Ryan Crocker characterized the turnout as "large".
[262] Of those who turned out to vote, some groups complained of disenfranchisement and fraud.
[261][263][264] After the post-election curfew was lifted, some groups made threats about what would happen if they were unhappy with the results.
[265]
File:President Obama's speech at Camp Lejeune on 2009-02-27.ogvPlay media
U.S. President Barack Obama delivering a speech at Camp Lejeune on 27 February 2009.
On 27 February, United States President Barack Obama gave a speech at Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune in the U.
S.
state of North Carolina announcing that the U.
S.
combat mission in Iraq would end by 31 August 2010.
A "transitional force" of up to 50,000 troops tasked with training the Iraqi Security Forces, conducting counterterrorism operations, and providing general support may remain until the end of 2011, the president added.
[266]
The day before Obama's speech, Prime Minister of Iraq Nuri al‑Maliki said at a press conference that the government of Iraq had "no worries" over the impending departure of U.
S.
forces and expressed confidence in the ability of the Iraqi Security Forces and police to maintain order without U.
S.
military support.
[267]
On 9 April, the 6th anniversary of Baghdad's fall to coalition forces, tens of thousands of Iraqis thronged Baghdad to mark the anniversary and demand the immediate departure of coalition forces.
The crowds of Iraqis stretched from the Sadr City slum in northeast Baghdad to the square around 5 km (3.
1 mi) away, where protesters burned an effigy featuring the face of U.
S.
President George W.
Bush.
[268] There were also Sunni Muslims in the crowd.
Police said many Sunnis, including prominent leaders such as a founding sheikh from the Sons of Iraq, took part.
[269]
On 30 April, the United Kingdom formally ended combat operations. Prime Minister Gordon Brown characterized the operation in Iraq as a "success story" because of UK troops' efforts.
Britain handed control of Basra to the United States Armed Forces.
[270]
On 28 July, Australia withdrew its combat forces as the Australian military presence in Iraq ended, per an agreement with the Iraqi government.
The withdrawal of U.S. forces began at the end of June, with 38 bases to be handed over to Iraqi forces.
On 29 June 2009, U.
S.
forces withdrew from Baghdad.
On 30 November 2009, Iraqi Interior Ministry officials reported that the civilian death toll in Iraq fell to its lowest level in November since the 2003 invasion.
[271]
U.S. Navy and Coast Guard personnel stand guard aboard the Al Basrah Oil Terminal in July 2009.
On 30 June and again on 11 December, the Iraqi ministry of oil awarded contracts to international oil companies for some of Iraq's many oil fields.
The winning oil companies enter joint ventures with the Iraqi ministry of oil, and the terms of the awarded contracts include extraction of oil for a fixed fee of approximately $1.
40 per barrel.
[272][273][274] The fees will only be paid once a production threshold set by the Iraqi ministry of oil is reached.
2010: U.S. drawdown and Operation New Dawn
On 17 February 2010, U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates announced that as of 1 September, the name "Operation Iraqi Freedom" would be replaced by "Operation New Dawn".
[275]
On 18 April, U.S. and Iraqi forces killed Abu Ayyub al-Masri the leader of al-Qaeda in Iraq in a joint American and Iraqi operation near Tikrit, Iraq.
[276] The coalition forces believed al-Masri to be wearing a suicide vest and proceeded cautiously.
After the lengthy exchange of fire and bombing of the house, the Iraqi troops stormed inside and found two women still alive, one of whom was al-Masri's wife, and four dead men, identified as al-Masri, Abu Abdullah al-Rashid al-Baghdadi, an assistant to al-Masri, and al-Baghdadi's son.
A suicide vest was indeed found on al-Masri's corpse, as the Iraqi Army subsequently stated.
[277] Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki announced the killings of Abu Omar al-Baghdadi and Abu Ayyub al-Masri at a news conference in Baghdad and showed reporters photographs of their bloody corpses.
"The attack was carried out by ground forces which surrounded the house, and also through the use of missiles," Mr Maliki said.
"During the operation computers were seized with e-mails and messages to the two biggest terrorists, Osama bin Laden and [his deputy] Ayman al-Zawahiri", Maliki added.
"The death of these terrorists is potentially the most significant blow to al‑Qaeda in Iraq since the beginning of the insurgency", he said.
"There is still work to do but this is a significant step forward in ridding Iraq of terrorists.
U.S. Vice President Joe Biden stated that the deaths of the top two al‑Qaeda figures in Iraq are "potentially devastating" blows to the terror network there and proof that Iraqi security forces are gaining ground.
[278]
On 20 June, Iraq's Central Bank was bombed in an attack that left 15 people dead and brought much of downtown Baghdad to a standstill.
The attack was claimed to have been carried out by the Islamic State of Iraq.
This attack was followed by another attack on Iraq's Bank of Trade building that killed 26 and wounded 52 people.
[279]
Iraqi commandos training under the supervision of soldiers from the U.S. 82nd Airborne in December 2010.
In late August 2010, insurgents conducted a major attack with at least 12 car bombs simultaneously detonating from Mosul to Basra and killing at least 51.
These attacks coincided with the U.
S.
plans for a withdrawal of combat troops.
[280]
From the end of August 2010, the United States attempted to dramatically cut its combat role in Iraq, with the withdrawal of all U.
S.
ground forces designated for active combat operations.
The last U.
S.
combat brigades departed Iraq in the early morning of 19 August.
Convoys of U.
S.
troops had been moving out of Iraq to Kuwait for several days, and NBC News broadcast live from Iraq as the last convoy crossed the border.
While all combat brigades left the country, an additional 50,000 personnel (including Advise and Assist Brigades) remained in the country to provide support for the Iraqi military.
[281][282] These troops are required to leave Iraq by 31 December 2011 under an agreement between the U.
S.
and Iraqi governments.
[283]
The desire to step back from an active counter-insurgency role did not however mean that the Advise and Assist Brigades and other remaining U.
S.
forces would not be caught up in combat.
A standards memo from the Associated Press reiterated "combat in Iraq is not over, and we should not uncritically repeat suggestions that it is, even if they come from senior officials".
[284]
State Department spokesman P. J. Crowley stated "... we are not ending our work in Iraq, We have a long-term commitment to Iraq.
"[285] On 31 August, Obama announced the end of Operation Iraqi Freedom from the Oval Office.
In his address, he covered the role of the United States' soft power, the effect the war had on the United States economy, and the legacy of the Afghanistan and Iraq wars.
[286]
On the same day in Iraq, at a ceremony at one of Saddam Hussein's former residences at Al Faw Palace in Baghdad, a number of U.
S.
dignitaries spoke in a ceremony for television cameras, avoiding overtones of the triumphalism present in U.
S.
announcements made earlier in the war.
Vice President Joe Biden expressed concerns regarding the ongoing lack of progress in forming a new Iraqi government, saying of the Iraqi people that "they expect a government that reflects the results of the votes they cast".
Gen.
Ray Odierno stated that the new era "in no way signals the end of our commitment to the people of Iraq".
Speaking in Ramadi earlier in the day, Gates said that U.
S.
forces "have accomplished something really quite extraordinary here, [but] how it all weighs in the balance over time I think remains to be seen".
When asked by reporters if the seven-year war was worth doing, Gates commented that "It really requires a historian's perspective in terms of what happens here in the long run".
He noted the Iraq War "will always be clouded by how it began" in regards Saddam Hussein's supposed weapons of mass destruction, which were never confirmed to have existed.
Gates continued, "This is one of the reasons that this war remains so controversial at home".
Ray Odierno was replaced by Lloyd Austin as Commander of U.
Alabama Army National Guard MP, MSG Schur, during a joint community policing patrol in Basra, 3 April 2010
On 7 September, two U.S. troops were killed and nine wounded in an incident at an Iraqi military base.
The incident is under investigation by Iraqi and U.
S.
forces, but it is believed that an Iraqi soldier opened fire on U.
S.
forces.
[288]
On 8 September, the U.S. Army announced the arrival in Iraq of the first specifically-designated Advise and Assist Brigade, the 3d Armored Cavalry Regiment.
It was announced that the unit would assume responsibilities in five southern provinces.
[289] From 10–13 September, Second Advise and Assist Brigade, 25th Infantry Division fought Iraqi insurgents near Diyala.
According to reports from Iraq, hundreds of members of the Sunni Awakening Councils may have switched allegiance back to the Iraqi insurgency or al Qaeda.
[290]
Wikileaks disclosed 391,832 classified U.S. military documents on the Iraq War.[291][292][293] Approximately, 58 people were killed with another 40 wounded in an attack on the Sayidat al‑Nejat church, a Chaldean Catholic church in Baghdad.
Responsibility for the attack was claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq organization.
[294]
Coordinated attacks in primarily Shia areas struck throughout Baghdad on 2 November, killing approximately 113 and wounding 250 with around 17 bombs.
[295]
Iraqi security forces transition towards self-reliance
Preparing to buy $13 billion worth of American arms, the Iraq Defense Ministry intends to transform the country's degraded conventional forces into a state-of-the-art military and become among the world's biggest customers for American military arms and equipment.
Part of the planned purchase includes 140 M1 Abrams main battle tanks.
Iraqi crews have already begun training on them.
In addition to the $13 billion purchase, the Iraqis have requested 18 F-16 Fighting Falcons as part of a $4.
2 billion program that also includes aircraft training and maintenance, AIM‑9 Sidewinder air-to-air missiles, laser-guided bombs and reconnaissance equipment.
[296] If approved by Congress, the first aircraft could arrive in spring 2013.
Under the plan, the first 10 pilots would be trained in the United States.
The Iraqi navy also inaugurated U.S.‑built Swift Class patrol boat at Umm Qasr, Iraq's main port at the northern end of the gulf.
Iraq is to take delivery of 14 more of these $20 million, 50‑foot craft before U.
S.
forces depart.
The high-speed vessels' main mission will be to protect the oil terminals at al‑Basra and Khor al-Amiya through which some 1.
7 million barrels a day are loaded into tankers for export.
Two U.
S.
‑built offshore support vessels, each costing $70 million, were expected to be delivered in 2011.
[296]
M1 Abrams tanks in Iraqi service, January 2011
The United States Department of Defense had issued notification of an additional $100 million proposed sales of arms from the U.
S.
to Iraq.
General Dynamics is to be the prime contractor on a $36 million deal for the supply of ammunition for Iraq's Abrams M1 A1 tanks.
The sale consists of: 14,010 TP-T M831A1 120mm Cartridges; 16,110 TPCSDS-T M865 120mm Cartridges; and 3,510 HEAT-MP-T M830A1 120mm Cartridges.
Raytheon is proposed as the prime contractor for a $68 million package of "Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) Systems".
[298]
In a move to legitimize the existing Iraqi government, the United Nations lifted the Saddam Hussein-era UN restrictions on Iraq.
These included allowing Iraq to have a civilian nuclear program, permitting the participation of Iraq in international nuclear and chemical weapons treaties, as well as returning control of Iraq's oil and gas revenue to the government and ending the Oil-for-Food Programme.
[299]
U.S. troops in Iraq and U.S. casualties by month, 2003–11
Muqtada al-Sadr returned to Iraq in the holy city of Najaf to lead the Sadrist movement after being in exile since 2007.
[300]
On 15 January 2011, three U.S. troops were killed in Iraq. One of the troops was killed on a military operation in central Iraq, while the other two troops were deliberately shot by one or two Iraqi soldiers during a training exercise.
[301]
On 6 June, five U.S. troops were killed in an apparent rocket attack on JSS Loyalty.[302] A sixth soldier, who was wounded in the attack, died 10 days later of his wounds.
[303]
On 29 June, three U.S. troops were killed in a rocket attack on a U.S. base located near the border with Iran.
It was speculated that the militant group responsible for the attack was the same one which attacked JSS Loyalty just over three weeks before.
[304] With the three deaths, June 2011, became the bloodiest month in Iraq for the U.
S.
military since June 2009, with 15 U.
S.
soldiers killed, only one of them outside combat.
[305]
In September, Iraq signed a contract to buy 18 Lockheed Martin F-16 warplanes, becoming the 26th nation to operate the F-16.
Because of windfall profits from oil, the Iraqi government is planning to double this originally planned 18, to 36 F-16s.
Iraq is relying on the U.
S.
military for air support as it rebuilds its forces and battles a stubborn Islamist insurgency.
[306]
With the collapse of the discussions about extending the stay of any U.S. troops beyond 2011, where they would not be granted any immunity from the Iraqi government, on 21 October 2011, President Obama announced at a White House press conference that all remaining U.
S.
troops and trainers would leave Iraq by the end of the year as previously scheduled, bringing the U.
S.
mission in Iraq to an end.
[307] The last American soldier to die in Iraq before the withdrawal was killed by a roadside bomb in Baghdad on 14 November.
[308]
In November 2011, the U.S. Senate voted down a resolution to formally end the war by bringing its authorization by Congress to an end.
[309]
U.S. and Kuwaiti troops closing the gate between Kuwait and Iraq on 18 December 2011.
The last U.S. troops withdrew from Iraq on 18 December, although the U.S. embassy and consulates continue to maintain a staff of more than 20,000 including U.
S.
Marine Embassy Guards and between 4,000 and 5,000 private military contractors.
[310][311] The next day, Iraqi officials issued an arrest warrant for the Sunni Vice-President Tariq al-Hashimi.
He has been accused of involvement in assassinations and fled to the Kurdish part of Iraq.
[312]
Controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS)
The invasion and occupation led to sectarian violence which caused widespread displacement among Iraqi civilians.
The Iraqi Red Crescent organization estimated the total internal displacement was around 2.
3 million in 2008, and as many as 2 million Iraqis leaving the country.
Poverty led many Iraqi women to turn to prostitution to support themselves and their families, attracting sex tourists from regional lands.
The invasion led to a constitution which supported democracy as long as laws did not violate traditional Islamic principles, and a parliamentary election was held in 2005.
In addition the invasion preserved the autonomy of the Kurdish region, and stability brought new economic prosperity.
Because the Kurdish region is historically the most democratic area of Iraq, many Iraqi refugees from other territories fled into the Kurdish land.
Iraqi insurgency surged in the aftermath of the U.S. withdrawal. The terror campaigns have since been engaged by Iraqi, primarily radical Sunni, insurgent groups against the central government and the warfare between various factions within Iraq.
The events of post U.
S.
withdrawal violence succeeded the previous insurgency in Iraq (prior to 18 December 2011), but have showed different patterns, raising concerns that the surging violence might slide into another civil war.
Some 1,000 people were killed across Iraq within the first two months after U.
S.
withdrawal.
Sectarian violence continued in the first half of 2013— at least 56 people died in April when a Sunni protest in Hawija was interrupted by a government-supported helicopter raid and a series of violent incidents occurred in May.
On 20 May 2013, at least 95 people died in a wave of car bomb attacks that was preceded by a car bombing on 15 May that led to 33 deaths; also, on 18 May, 76 people were killed in the Sunni areas of Baghdad.
Some experts have stated that Iraq could return to the brutal sectarian conflict of 2006.
[314][315]
On 22 July 2013, at least five hundred convicts, most of whom were senior members of al-Qaida who had received death sentences, broke out of Iraq's Abu Ghraib jail when comrades launched a military-style assault to free them.
The attack began when a suicide bomber drove a car packed with explosives into prison gates.
[316] James F.
Jeffrey, the United States ambassador in Baghdad when the last American troops exited, said the assault and resulting escape "will provide seasoned leadership and a morale boost to Al Qaeda and its allies in both Iraq and Syria .
.
.
it is likely to have an electrifying impact on the Sunni population in Iraq, which has been sitting on the fence.
"[317]
By mid-2014 the country was in chaos with a new government yet to be formed following national elections, and the insurgency reaching new heights.
In early June 2014 the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) took over the cities of Mosul and Tikrit and said it was ready to march on Baghdad, while Iraqi Kurdish forces took control of key military installations in the major oil city of Kirkuk.
Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki asked his parliament to declare a state of emergency that would give him increased powers, but the lawmakers refused.
[318]
In the summer of 2014 President Obama announced the return of U.S. Forces to Iraq, but only in the form of aerial support, in an effort to halt the advance of ISIS forces, render humanitarian aid to stranded refugees and stabilize the political situation.
[319] On 14 August 2014, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki succumbed to pressure at home and abroad to step down.
This paved the way for Haidar al-Abadi to take over On 19 August 2014.
In what was claimed to be revenge for the aerial bombing ordered by President Obama, ISIS, which by this time had changed their name to the Islamic State, beheaded an American journalist, James Foley, who had been kidnapped two years previously.
Despite U.
S.
bombings and breakthroughs on the political front, Iraq remained in chaos with the Islamic State consolidating its gains, and sectarian violence continuing unabated.
On 22 August 2014, suspected Shia militants opened fire on a Sunni mosque during Friday prayers, killing 70 worshippers.
Separately, Iraqi forces in helicopters killed 30 Sunni fighters in the town of Dhuluiya.
[320] A day later, apparently in retaliation for the attack on the mosque, three bombings across Iraq killed 35 people.
Wounded U.S. personnel flown from Iraq to Ramstein, Germany, for medical treatment (February 2007)
Marines unload a wounded comrade from an Army UH-60 Blackhawk helicopter for medical treatment at Al Qaim.
For coalition death totals see the infobox at the top right. See also Casualties of the Iraq War, which has casualty numbers for coalition nations, contractors, non-Iraqi civilians, journalists, media helpers, aid workers, and the wounded.
Casualty figures, especially Iraqi ones, are highly disputed.
There have been several attempts by the media, coalition governments and others to estimate the Iraqi casualties.
The table below summarizes some of these estimates and methods.
Source 	Iraqi casualties 	March 2003 to ...
Iraq Family Health Survey 	151,000 violent deaths. 	June 2006
Lancet survey 	601,027 violent deaths out of 654,965 excess deaths. 	June 2006
PLOS Medicine Study 	460,000 excess deaths including 132,000 violent deaths from conflict violent deaths from the conflict.
[322] 	June 2011
Opinion Research Business survey 	1,033,000 violent deaths from the conflict. 	August 2007
Iraqi Health Ministry 	87,215 violent deaths per death certificates issued.
Ministry estimates up to 20% more deaths are undocumented. 	January 2005 to
Associated Press 	110,600 violent deaths.
Health Ministry death certificates plus AP estimate of casualties for 2003–04. 	April 2009
Iraq Body Count 	105,052–114,731 violent civilian deaths.
compiled from commercial news media, NGO and official reports.
Over 162,000 civilian and combatant deaths 	January 2012
WikiLeaks. Classified Iraq war logs 	109,032 violent deaths including 66,081 civilian deaths. 	January 2004 to
A local memorial in North Carolina in December 2007; U.S. casualty count can be seen in the background.
[323]
The Bush Administration's rationale for the Iraq War has faced heavy criticism from an array of popular and official sources both inside and outside the United States, with many U.
S.
citizens finding many parallels with the Vietnam War.
[324] For example, a former CIA officer described the Office of Special Plans as a group of ideologues who were dangerous to U.
S.
national security and a threat to world peace, and stated that the group lied and manipulated intelligence to further its agenda of removing Saddam.
[325] The Center for Public Integrity alleges that the Bush administration made a total of 935 false statements between 2001 and 2003 about Iraq's alleged threat to the United States.
[326]
Both proponents and opponents of the invasion have also criticized the prosecution of the war effort along a number of other lines.
Most significantly, critics have assailed the United States and its allies for not devoting enough troops to the mission, not adequately planning for post-invasion Iraq, and for permitting and perpetrating human rights abuses.
As the war has progressed, critics have also railed against the high human and financial costs.
States participating in the invasion of Iraq
States with an uncertain or no official standpoint
Human rights violations such as the Iraq prison abuse scandals
Insufficient post-invasion plans, in particular inadequate troop levels (a RAND Corporation study stated that 500,000 troops would be required for success)[329]
Financial costs with approximately $612 billion spent as of 4/09 the CBO has estimated the total cost of the war in Iraq to the United States will be around $1.
9 trillion.
[330]
Adverse effect on U.S.-led global "war on terror"[331][332]
Damage to U.S.' traditional alliances and influence in the region, especially Israel[333] and Saudi Arabia.
[334]
Endangerment and ethnic cleansing of religious and ethnic minorities by insurgents[196][335][336][337][338]
Disruption of Iraqi oil production and related energy security concerns (the price of oil has quadrupled since 2002)[339][340]
After President Barack Obama was inaugurated in 2009, some anti-war groups decided to stop protesting even though the war was still going on.
Some of them decided to stop because they felt they should give the new President time to establish his administration, and others stopped because they believed that Obama would end the war.
[341]
The financial cost of the war has been more than £4.55 billion ($9 billion) to the UK,[342] and over $845 billion to the U.
S.
government.
According to Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph E.
Stiglitz and Harvard public finance professor Linda Bilmes it costs the United States $720 million a day to wage the Iraq war.
This number takes into account the long-term health care for veterans, interest on debt and replacement of military hardware.
[343]
In March 2013, the total cost of the Iraq War was estimated to have been $1.7 trillion by the Watson Institute of International Studies at Brown University.
[344] Critics have argued that the total cost of the war to the U.
S.
economy is estimated to be from $3 trillion[345] to $6 trillion,[346] including interest rates, by 2053.
The upper ranges of these estimates include long-term veterans costs and economic impacts.
For example, Harvard's public finance expert Linda J.
Bilmes has estimated that the long-term cost of providing disability compensation and medical care to U.
S.
troops injured in the Iraq conflict will reach nearly $1 trillion over the next 40 years.
[347]
A CNN report noted that the United States-led interim government, the Coalition Provisional Authority lasting until 2004 in Iraq had lost $8.
8 billion in the Development Fund for Iraq.
In June 2011, it was reported by CBS News that $6 billion in neatly packaged blocks of $100 bills was air-lifted into Iraq by the George W.
Bush administration, which flew it into Baghdad aboard C‑130 military cargo planes.
In total, the Times says $12 billion in cash was flown into Iraq in 21 separate flights by May 2004, all of which has disappeared.
An inspector general's report mentioned that "'Severe inefficiencies and poor management' by the Coalition Provisional Authority would leave no guarantee that the money was properly used", said Stuart W.
Bowen, Jr.
, director of the Office of the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction.
"The CPA did not establish or implement sufficient managerial, financial and contractual controls to ensure that funds were used in a transparent manner.
"[348] Bowen told the Times the missing money may represent "the largest theft of funds in national history.
Child killed by a car bomb in Kirkuk, July 2011
The child malnutrition rate rose to 28%.[350] Some 60–70% of Iraqi children were reported to be suffering from psychological problems in 2007.
[351] Most Iraqis had no access to safe drinking water.
A cholera outbreak in northern Iraq was thought to be the result of poor water quality.
[352] As many as half of Iraqi doctors left the country between 2003 and 2006.
[353] The use of depleted uranium and white phosphorus by the U.
S.
military has been blamed for birth defects and cancers in the Iraqi city of Fallujah.
[354][355][356] A study entitled "Birth defects in Iraq and the plausibility of environmental exposure: A review" was completed to review the impact of other war-related environmental factors on birth defects in Iraq.
[357]
As of 2011, nearly 3 million Iraqis have been displaced, with 1.3 million within the Iraq and 1.6 million in neighboring countries, mainly Jordan and Syria.
[358] More than half of Iraqi Christians have fled to neighboring countries since the start of the war.
[359][360]
The Foreign Policy Association reported that "Perhaps the most perplexing component of the Iraq refugee crisis .
.
.
has been the inability for the United States to absorb more Iraqis following the 2003 invasion of the country.
To date, the United States has granted around 84,000 Iraqis refugee status, of the more than two million global Iraqi refugees.
By contrast, the United States granted asylum to more than 100,000 Vietnamese refugees during the Vietnam War.
"[361][362][363]
Gun camera footage of the airstrike of 12 July 2007 in Baghdad, showing the slaying of Namir Noor-Eldeen and a dozen other civilians by an US helicopter.
Throughout the entire Iraq war, there have been human rights abuses on all sides of the conflict.
The use of torture by Iraqi security forces.[364]
Iraqi police from the Interior Ministry accused of forming Death Squads and committing numerous massacres and tortures of Sunni Arabs[365] and the police collusion with militias in Iraq have compounded the problems.
This photograph from Abu Ghraib released in 2006 shows a pyramid of naked Iraqi prisoners.
Deaths of civilians as a result of bombing and missile strikes.[366]
Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse by U.S. Army personnel.[367]
Haditha killings of 24 civilians (ongoing with some charges dropped)
Rape and murder of an Iraqi girl, and murder of her family.[368]
The torture and killing of prisoner of war, Iraqi Air Force commander, Abed Hamed Mowhoush
Mukaradeeb wedding party massacre[369] where 42 civilians were allegedly killed by coalition forces.
Planting weapons on noncombatant, unarmed Iraqis by three U.S. Marines after killing them.[370][371] According to a report by The Nation, other similar acts have been witnessed by U.
S.
soldiers.
[372] Members of Iraq Veterans Against the War tell similar stories.
[373]
Allegations of beatings, electrocution, mock executions, and sexual assault by British troops were presented to the International Criminal Court (ICC) by Public Interest Lawyers (PIL) and the European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights (ECCHR) on 12 January 2014.
[374]
Car bombings are a frequently used tactic by insurgents in Iraq.
Killing over 12,000 Iraqis from January 2005 to June 2006, according to Iraqi Interior Minister Bayan Jabr, giving the first official count for the victims of bombings, ambushes and other deadly attacks.
[375] The insurgents have also conducted numerous suicide attacks on the Iraqi civilian population, mostly targeting the majority Shia community.
[376][377] An October 2005 report from Human Rights Watch examines the range of civilian attacks and their purported justification.
[378]
Attacks against civilians including children through bombing of market places and other locations reachable by suicide bombers.
Attacks against civilians by sectarian death squads primarily during the Iraqi Civil war.
Attacks on diplomats and diplomatic facilities including; the bombing of the UN headquarters in Baghdad in August 2003 killing the top UN representative in Iraq and 21 other UN staff members;[379] beheading several diplomats: two Algerian diplomatic envoys Ali Belaroussi and Azzedine Belkadi,[380] Egyptian diplomatic envoy al-Sherif,[381] and four Russian diplomats.
[382]
The February 2006 bombing of the al-Askari Mosque, destroying one of the holiest Shiite shrines, killing over 165 worshipers and igniting sectarian strife and reprisal killings.
[383]
The publicised killing of several contractors; Eugene Armstrong, Jack Hensley, Kenneth Bigley, Ivaylo Kepov and Georgi Lazov (Bulgarian truck drivers.
)[384] Other non-military personnel murdered include: translator Kim Sun-il, Shosei Koda, Fabrizio Quattrocchi (Italian), charity worker Margaret Hassan, reconstruction engineer Nick Berg, photographer Salvatore Santoro (Italian)[385] and supply worker Seif Adnan Kanaan (Iraqi.
) Four private armed contractors, Scott Helvenston, Jerko Zovko, Wesley Batalona and Michael Teague, were killed with grenades and small arms fire, their bodies dragged from their vehicles, beaten and set ablaze.
Their burned corpses were then dragged through the streets before being hung over a bridge crossing the Euphrates.
[386]
Torture or killing of members of the New Iraqi Army,[387] and assassination of civilians associated with the Coalition Provisional Authority, such as Fern Holland, or the Iraqi Governing Council, such as Aqila al-Hashimi and Ezzedine Salim, or other foreign civilians, such as those from Kenya.
[388]
Protesters on 19 March 2005, in London, where organizers claim over 150,000 marched
According to a January 2007 BBC World Service poll of more than 26,000 people in 25 countries, 73% of the global population disapproved of U.
S.
handling of the Iraq War.
[389] A September 2007 poll conducted by the BBC found that two-thirds of the world's population believed the U.
S.
should withdraw its forces from Iraq.
[390]
In 2006 it was found that majorities in the UK and Canada believed that the war in Iraq was "unjustified" and – in the UK – were critical of their government's support of U.
S.
policies in Iraq.
[391]
According to polls conducted by the Arab American Institute, four years after the invasion of Iraq, 83% of Egyptians had a negative view of the U.
S.
role in Iraq; 68% of Saudi Arabians had a negative view; 96% of the Jordanian population had a negative view; 70% of the population of the United Arab Emirates and 76% of the Lebanese population also described their view as negative.
[392] The Pew Global Attitudes Project reports that in 2006 majorities in the Netherlands, Germany, Jordan, France, Lebanon, Russia, China, Canada, Poland, Pakistan, Spain, Indonesia, Turkey, and Morocco believed the world was safer before the Iraq War and the toppling of Saddam, while pluralities in the United States and India believe the world is safer without Saddam Hussein.
[393]
A woman pleads with an Iraqi army soldier from 2nd Company, 5th Brigade, 2nd Iraqi Army Division to let a suspected insurgent free during a raid near Tafaria, Iraq
Directly after the invasion, polling suggested that a slight majority supported the U.S. invasion.[394] Polls conducted between 2005 and 2007 showed 31–37% of Iraqi's wanted U.
S.
and other Coalition forces to withdraw once security was restored and that 26–35% wanted immediate withdrawal instead.
[395][396][397] Despite a majority having previously been opposed to the U.
S.
presence, 60% of Iraqis opposed American troops leaving directly prior to withdrawal, with 51% saying withdrawal would have a negative effect.
[398][399] In 2006, a poll conducted on the Iraqi public revealed that 52% of the ones polled said Iraq was going in the right direction and 61% claimed it was worth ousting Saddam Hussein.
[395]
Though explicitly stating that Iraq had "nothing" to do with 9/11,[400] erstwhile President George W.
Bush consistently referred to the Iraq war as "the central front in the War on Terror", and argued that if the United States pulled out of Iraq, "terrorists will follow us here".
[401][402][403] While other proponents of the war have regularly echoed this assertion, as the conflict has dragged on, members of the U.
S.
Congress, the U.
S.
public, and even U.
S.
troops have questioned the connection between Iraq and the fight against anti-U.
S.
terrorism.
In particular, a consensus has developed among intelligence experts that the Iraq war has increased terrorism.
Counterterrorism expert Rohan Gunaratna frequently refers to the invasion of Iraq as a "fatal mistake".
[404]
London's conservative International Institute for Strategic Studies concluded in 2004 that the occupation of Iraq had become "a potent global recruitment pretext" for Mujahideen and that the invasion "galvanised" al-Qaeda and "perversely inspired insurgent violence" there.
[405] The U.
S.
National Intelligence Council concluded in a January 2005 report that the war in Iraq had become a breeding ground for a new generation of terrorists; David Low, the national intelligence officer for transnational threats, indicated that the report concluded that the war in Iraq provided terrorists with "a training ground, a recruitment ground, the opportunity for enhancing technical skills .
.
.
There is even, under the best scenario, over time, the likelihood that some of the jihadists who are not killed there will, in a sense, go home, wherever home is, and will therefore disperse to various other countries.
" The Council's chairman Robert Hutchings said, "At the moment, Iraq is a magnet for international terrorist activity.
"[406] And the 2006 National Intelligence Estimate, which outlined the considered judgment of all 16 U.
intelligence agencies, held that "The Iraq conflict has become the 'cause célèbre' for jihadists, breeding a deep resentment of U.
involvement in the Muslim world and cultivating supporters for the global jihadist movement.
Origins of suicide bombers in Iraq 2003–2007
*Three each from Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Turkey, Yemen; two each from Belgium, France, Spain; one each from Britain, Lebanon, Morocco, Sudan[408]
According to studies, most of the suicide bombers in Iraq are foreigners, especially Saudis.[408][409][410]
Although some military intelligence analysts have concluded there is no concrete evidence, U.S. Major General Rick Lynch has claimed that Iran has provided training, weapons, money, and intelligence to Shiite insurgents in Iraq and that up to 150 Iranian intelligence agents, plus members of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard are believed to be active in Iraq at any given time.
[411][412] Lynch thinks that members of the Iranian Quds Force and the Iranian Revolutionary Guard have trained members of the Qazali terror network in explosives technology and also provided the network with arms, munitions, and military advisors.
Many explosive devices, including improvised explosives (IEDs) and explosively-formed projectiles (EFPs), used by insurgents are claimed by Lynch to be Iranian-made or designed.
According to two unnamed U.S. officials, the Pentagon is examining the possibility that the Karbala provincial headquarters raid, in which insurgents managed to infiltrate an American base, kill five U.
S.
soldiers, wound three, and destroy three humvees before fleeing, was supported by Iranians.
In a speech on 31 January 2007, Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki stated that Iran was supporting attacks against Coalition forces in Iraq[413] and some Iraqis suspect that the raid may have been perpetrated by the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps's Qods Force in retaliation for the detention of five Iranian officials by U.
S.
forces in the northern Iraqi city of Irbil on 11 January.
[414][415]
Michael Weiss and Dexter Filkins have described the extensive involvement of Iranian Quds Force commander Qasem Suleimani in arming and training both Sunni and Shi'ite militias in Iraq.
According to Weiss, Iranian strategy was designed to prevent the Iraqi government from functioning so that Iran could exert greater control over the country under the guise of providing stability.
Weiss also traced the origins of al Qaeda in Iraq, which entered Iraqi Kurdistan through Iran, to covert Iranian operations to destabilize the Iraqi government of Saddam Hussein.
[416] According to a Western diplomat quoted by Filkins: "Suleimani wanted to bleed the Americans, so he invited in the jihadis, and things got out of control.
"[417] In 2011, U.
S.
ambassador James Jeffrey stated that Iranian proxies were responsible for roughly one-fourth of U.
12 July 2007 Baghdad airstrike (associated with WikiLeaks in 2010)
Overseas interventions of the United States
United Nations Security Council and the Iraq War
United States military casualties of war
